Working Together to
Safeguard Children
2023
A guide to multi-agency working
to help, protect and promote the welfare
of children



December 2023
Table of Contents
Introduction                                                                           7
  About this guidance                                                                  8
  What is the status of this guidance?                                                 9
  Who is this guidance for?                                                            10
Chapter 1: A shared responsibility                                                     11
  A child-centred approach within a whole family focus                                 11
  Principles for working with parents and carers                                       14
  Expectations for multi-agency working                                                16
  Information sharing                                                                  18
Chapter 2: Multi-agency safeguarding arrangements                                      23
  Geography                                                                            25
  Strategic leadership and accountability                                              26
  Delivering multi-agency safeguarding arrangements                                    28
  Relevant agencies                                                                    31
  Working with schools, colleges, early years, and other education providers           33
  Working with voluntary, charity, social enterprise (VCSE) organisations and sports
  clubs                                                                                35
  Information requests                                                                 35
  Independent scrutiny                                                                 36
  Funding                                                                              38
  Reporting                                                                            39
  Publication of arrangements                                                          39
  Yearly report                                                                        40
  Dispute resolution process                                                           42
Chapter 3: Providing help, support and protection                                      43
  Local criteria for providing help, support, and protection                           43
  Section 1: Early help                                                                44
      Identifying children and families who would benefit from help                    45
      The role of education and childcare settings                                     47
      Effective assessment of the need for early help                                  49




                                              2
    Provision of effective services to help families                                     50
Section 2: Safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children                           51
    Statutory requirements for children in need                                          53
    Local protocols for assessment and support                                           54
    Purpose of assessment                                                                56
    Assessment framework                                                                 57
    Referral                                                                             57
    Timeliness                                                                           58
    Provision of support and services for a child in need                                59
    Focusing on the needs of the child and their family                                  60
    Analysis and decision-making                                                         62
    Focusing on outcomes                                                                 64
    Supporting disabled children and their carers                                        65
    Supporting young carers                                                              67
    Supporting children at risk of, or experiencing, harm outside the home               67
    Supporting children in secure youth establishments                                   70
    Supporting children in mother and baby units                                         70
    Supporting children at risk from people in prison and people supervised by the
    Probation Service                                                              71
    Assessment, support and planning for children under the Children Act 1989            73
    Flow chart 1: Action taken when a child is referred to local authority children’s
    social care                                                                          77
    Looked after children returning home to their families                               78
    Flow chart 2: Looked after children returning home to their families                 79
Section 3: Child protection                                                             80
    National multi-agency practice standards for child protection                        81
    Immediate protection                                                                 86
    Strategy discussion                                                                  87
    Initiating section 47 enquiries                                                      91
    Outcome of section 47 enquiries                                                      93
    Initial child protection conferences                                                 95
    The child protection plan                                                            98
    Child protection review conference                                                  100
    Discontinuing the child protection plan                                             103
    Initiating pre-proceedings                                                          105




                                           3
       Flow chart 3: Immediate protection                                               106
       Flow chart 4: Action taken for an assessment of a child under the Children Act
       1989                                                                           107
       Flow chart 5: Action following a strategy meeting                                108
       Flow chart 6: What happens after the child protection conference, including review?
                                                                                      109
Chapter 4: Organisational responsibilities                                              110
  People in positions of trust                                                          112
  Individual organisational responsibilities                                            113
       Schools, colleges and other educational providers                                113
       Early years and childcare                                                        114
       Health                                                                           114
       Police                                                                           117
       Adult social care services                                                       119
       Housing services                                                                 119
       Homelessness duty                                                                120
       British Transport Police                                                         121
       The Prison Service                                                               121
       Mother and baby units in prisons                                                 124
       The Probation Service                                                            124
       Multi-agency public protection arrangements                                      126
       Serious violence duty                                                            128
       Children’s homes                                                                 128
       The secure estate for children                                                   129
       Youth offending teams                                                            130
       UK Visas and Immigration, Immigration Enforcement and the Border Force           130
       Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service                           130
       The armed services                                                               131
       Channel panels                                                                   131
       Voluntary, charity, social enterprise, faith-based organisations, and private sectors
                                                                                         132
       Sports clubs/organisations                                                       133
Chapter 5: Learning from serious child safeguarding incidents                           135
  Purpose of child safeguarding practice reviews                                        135
  Responsibilities for reviews                                                          135




                                               4
  Duty on local authorities to notify incidents to the Child Safeguarding Practice Review
  Panel                                                                                 137
  Decisions on local and national reviews                                              138
  The rapid review                                                                     140
  Guidance for the National Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel                   141
  Commissioning a reviewer(s) for a local child safeguarding practice review           143
  Local child safeguarding practice reviews                                            143
  Safeguarding partners – expectations of the final report                             144
  Actions in response to local and national reviews                                    146
  Guidance for the Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel – reviewers                146
  The panel – expectations for the final report                                        146
  How to notify a serious incident, rapid review, and local child safeguarding practice
  review                                                                                148
Chapter 6: Child death reviews                                                         149
  Statutory requirements                                                               150
  Responsibilities of child death review partners                                      151
  Responsibilities of other organisations and agencies                                 153
      Specific responsibilities of relevant bodies in relation to child deaths         153
  Responding to the death of a child: the child death review process                   154
      The child death review process                                                   155
Appendix A: Glossary                                                                   158
Appendix B: Further sources of information                                             167
  Guidance issued by the Department for Education                                      167
  Guidance issued by other government departments and agencies                         168
  Guidance issued by external organisations                                            170




                                              5
Table of figures
Figure 1: Assessment framework ..................................................................................... 57
Figure 2: Process to follow when a child dies ................................................................. 154




                                                          6
Introduction
Nothing is more important than children’s welfare. Every child deserves to grow up in a
safe, stable, and loving home. Children who need help and protection deserve high quality
and effective support. This requires individuals, agencies, and organisations to be clear
about their own and each other’s roles and responsibilities, and how they work together.

In this guidance, a child is defined as anyone who has not yet reached their 18th birthday.
‘Children’ therefore means ‘children and young people’ throughout. The term practitioner
is used in the guidance to refer to individuals who work with children and their families in
any capacity, including a range of professionals, such as qualified social workers and
those who work for the statutory safeguarding partners or in education settings.

Whilst it is parents and carers who have primary care for their children, local authorities,
working with partner organisations and agencies, have specific duties to safeguard and
promote the welfare of all children in their area. The Children Act 1989 1 sets out specific
duties to provide services to children in their area if they are in need and to undertake
enquiries if they believe a child has suffered or is likely to suffer significant harm. The
Director of Children’s Services and Lead Member for Children’s Services in local
authorities are the key points of professional and political accountability, with
responsibility for the effective delivery of these functions. The Children Act 2004 2 placed a
duty on the local authority to promote co-operation with partners and other agencies in
order to improve the wellbeing of children in their area. It also placed duties on a range of
organisations and individuals to ensure they too give sufficient regard to children in need
of help and safeguarding.

Amendments made by the Children and Social Work Act 2017 to the Children Act 2004
strengthened this already important relationship by placing new duties on the police,
integrated care boards (ICBs) 3 and the local authority, as statutory safeguarding partners.
Safeguarding partners are under a duty to make arrangements to work together, and with
other partners locally including education providers and childcare settings, to safeguard
and promote the welfare of all children in their area.

Safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children is defined for the purposes of this
guidance as:
     •    providing help and support to meet the needs of children as soon as problems
          emerge




1
  Children Act 1989
2
  Children Act 2004
3
  Statutory guidance for integrated care boards on executive lead roles




                                                                  7
       •    protecting children from maltreatment, whether that is within or outside the home,
            including online
       •    preventing impairment of children’s mental and physical health or development
       •    ensuring that children grow up in circumstances consistent with the provision of
            safe and effective care
       •    promoting the upbringing of children with their birth parents, or otherwise their
            family network 4 through a kinship care arrangement, whenever possible and where
            this is in the best interests of the children
       •    taking action to enable all children to have the best outcomes in line with the
            outcomes set out in the Children’s Social Care National Framework 5.

Child protection is part of safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children and is
defined for the purpose of this guidance as activity that is undertaken to protect specific
children who are suspected to be suffering, or likely to suffer, significant harm. This
includes harm that occurs inside or outside the home, including online.

Effective safeguarding means practitioners should understand and be sensitive to factors,
including economic and social circumstances and ethnicity, which can impact children and
families’ lives.


About this guidance
1.          This guidance covers:

       •    the legislative requirements that apply to individuals, organisations and agencies
       •    a framework for the three local safeguarding partners (the local authority, an ICB
            for an area, any part of which falls within the local authority area, and the Chief
            Constable for police for a police area, any part of which falls within the local
            authority area) to make arrangements to work together to safeguard and promote
            the welfare of local children, including identifying and responding to their needs
       •    the framework for the two child death review partners (the local authority and any
            ICB for an area, any part of which falls within the local authority area) to make
            arrangements to review all deaths of children normally resident in the local area,
            and if they consider it appropriate, for those not normally resident in the area




4
    A family network can be a blood-relative, or a non-related connected person, such as a family friend or neighbour.
5
    Children’s Social Care National Framework




                                                                    8
2.     This document replaces Working together to safeguard children (2018). Links to
relevant supplementary guidance that practitioners should consider alongside this
guidance can be found at Appendix B.


What is the status of this guidance?
3.      This guidance applies to all organisations and agencies who have functions
relating to children. Specifically, this guidance applies to all local authorities, ICBs, police
and all other organisations and agencies as set out in chapter 4.

4.       It applies, in its entirety, to all education providers, and childcare settings.

5.      It applies to all children up to the age of 18 years whether living with their families,
in state care, or living independently.

6.       This document should be complied with unless exceptional circumstances arise.

7.       The guidance is issued under:

     •   section 7 of the Local Authority Social Services Act 1970, which requires local
         authorities in their social services functions to act under the general guidance of the
         Secretary of State
     •   section 10(8) of the Children Act 2004, which requires each person or organisation
         to which the section 10 duty applies to have regard to any guidance given to them
         by the Secretary of State
     •   section 11(4) of the Children Act 2004 which requires each person or organisation
         to which the section 11 duty applies to have regard to any guidance given to them
         by the Secretary of State
     •   section 16B(7) of the Children Act 2004, as amended by the Children and Social
         Work Act 2017, which states that the Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel
         must have regard to any guidance given by the Secretary of State in connection
         with its functions
     •   section 16C(2) of the Children Act 2004, as amended by the Children and Social
         Work Act 2017, which states that local authorities must have regard to any
         guidance given by the Secretary of State in connection with their functions relating
         to notifications
     •   section 16K of the Children Act 2004, as amended by the Children and Social Work
         Act 2017, which states that safeguarding partners and relevant agencies for a local
         authority area in England must have regard to any guidance given by the Secretary
         of State in connection with their functions under sections 16E to 16J of the Act




                                                 9
   •   section 16Q of the Children Act 2004, as amended by the Children and Social
       Work Act 2017, which states that the child death review partners for a local
       authority area in England must have regard to any guidance given by the Secretary
       of State in connection with their functions under sections 16M to 16P of the Act
   •   section 175(4) of the Education Act 2002, which states that governing bodies of
       maintained schools (including maintained nursery schools), further education
       institutions and management committees of pupil referral units must have regard to
       any guidance given by the Secretary of State
   •   paragraph 7(b) of the Schedule to the Education (Independent School Standards)
       Regulations 2014, made under sections 94(1) and (2) of the Education and Skills
       Act 2008, which states that the arrangements to safeguard or promote the welfare
       of pupils made by the proprietors of independent schools (including academies or
       free schools) or alternative provision academies must have regard to any guidance
       given by the Secretary of State

   •   paragraph 3 of the Schedule to the Non-Maintained Special Schools (England)
       Regulations 2015, made under section 342 of the Education Act 1996, which
       requires arrangements for safeguarding and promoting the health, safety, and
       welfare of pupils in non-maintained special schools to have regard to any guidance
       published on such issues

Who is this guidance for?
8.      This statutory guidance sets out key roles for individual organisations and agencies
to deliver effective arrangements for help, support, safeguarding, and protection. It should
be read and followed by leaders, managers and frontline practitioners of all organisations
and agencies as set out in chapter 4 of this document.

9.      It is essential that these arrangements are strongly led and promoted at a local
level, specifically by elected local area leaders, including Lead Members of Children’s
Services, Mayors, Police and Crime Commissioners and through the commitment of chief
officers in all organisations and agencies, particularly those representing the three
safeguarding partners. These are local authority Chief Executives, Chief Constables of
police and Chief Executives of ICBs. Other senior leaders within organisations and
agencies that commission and provide services for children and families, and education
settings also have a key role to play in providing help, support, and safeguarding children
in their local area. Members of the Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel should also
read and follow this guidance.




                                            10
Chapter 1: A shared responsibility
10.   Successful outcomes for children depend on strong partnership working between
parents/carers and the practitioners working with them. Practitioners should take a child-
centred approach to meeting the needs of the whole family.

11.    As set out in the Children’s Social Care National Framework, the following
principles apply here too:
      •   children’s welfare is paramount
      •   children’s wishes and feelings are sought, heard, and responded to
      •   children’s social care works in partnership with whole families
      •   children are raised by their families, with their family networks or in family
          environments wherever possible
      •   local authorities work with other agencies to effectively identify and meet the needs
          of children, young people, and families
      •   local authorities consider the economic and social circumstances impacting
          children, young people, and families

A child-centred approach within a whole family focus
12.     A child-centred approach is fundamental to safeguarding and promoting the
welfare of every child. All practitioners should follow the principles of the Children Acts
1989 and 2004. These Acts make clear that the welfare of children is paramount and that
they are best looked after within their families, with their parents playing a full part in their
lives, unless compulsory intervention in family life is necessary.

13.       Children are clear about what they want from an effective safeguarding system:




                                                 11
    Children have said that they need:

         •    vigilance: to have adults notice when things are troubling them
         •    understanding and action: to understand what is happening; to be heard and
              understood; and to have that understanding acted upon
         •    stability: to be able to develop an ongoing stable relationship of trust with
              those helping them
         •    respect: to be treated with the expectation that they are competent rather than
              not
         •    information and engagement: to be informed about, and involved in
              procedures, decisions, concerns and plans
         •    explanation: to be informed of the outcome of assessments, and decisions and
              reasons when their views have not met with a positive response
         •    support: to be provided with support in their own right as well as a member of
              their family
         •    advocacy: to be provided with advocacy to assist them in putting forward their
              views
         •    protection: to be protected against all forms of abuse, exploitation, and
              discrimination, and the right to special protection and help if a refugee


14.     Anyone working with children should see and speak to the child, listen to what
they say, observe their behaviour, take their views seriously, and work with them and their
families and the people who know them well when deciding how to support their needs.
Practitioners should also be aware that children may find it difficult to always speak about
what they need, what is happening to them or what has happened to them. Legal duties
under the Equality Act 2010 6 must be complied with, including putting special provision in
place to support dialogue with children who may not be able to convey their wishes and
feelings as they may want to. This might include, for example, those who have
communication difficulties, unaccompanied children, refugees, those children who are
victims of modern slavery and/or trafficking and those who do not speak English or for
whom English is not their first language.




6
    Equality Act 2010




                                                  12
15.     This approach sits within a whole family culture in which the needs of all members
of the family are explored as individuals and how their needs impact on one another is
drawn out.

16.       This child-centred approach is supported by:

      •   the Children Act 1989, which requires local authorities to give due consideration to
          a child’s wishes when determining what services to provide under section 17 and
          before making decisions about action to be taken to protect individual children
          under section 47. These duties complement requirements relating to the wishes
          and feelings of children who are, or may be, looked after (section 22(4)), including
          those who are provided with accommodation under section 20 and children taken
          into police protection (section 46(3)(d)).
      •   the Equality Act 2010, which puts a responsibility on public authorities to have due
          regard to the need to eliminate discrimination and promote equality of opportunity.
          This applies to the process of identification of need and risk faced by the individual
          child and the process of assessment. No child or group of children must be treated
          any less favourably than others in being able to access effective services which
          meet their particular needs. To comply with the Equality Act 2010, safeguarding
          partners must assess and where appropriate put in place measures ahead of time
          to support all children and families to access services, overcoming any barriers
          they may face due to a particular protected characteristic.
      •   the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) 7 which is an
          international agreement that protects the rights of children and provides a child-
          centred framework for the development of services to children. The UK
          Government ratified the UNCRC in 1991 and, by doing so, recognises children’s
          rights including to expression and receiving information.
      •   the Domestic Abuse Act 2021, section 3 8 recognises that a child is a victim of
          domestic abuse in their own right if they see, hear or experience the effects of
          domestic abuse and are related to either victim or perpetrator of the abuse, or
          either the victim or perpetrator of the abuse has parental responsibility for that
          child.
      •   the Children’s Social Care National Framework 9, published in 2023, is statutory
          guidance that sets out the purpose of children’s social care as existing to support
          children and families, to protect children by intervening decisively when they are at




7
  United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
8
  Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Section 3
9
  Children's Social Care National Framework




                                                         13
       risk of harm and to provide care for those who need it, so they grow up and thrive
       with safety, stability, and love

17.    In addition to practitioners shaping support around the needs of individual children,
local organisations and agencies should have a clear understanding of the collective
needs of children locally when commissioning effective services. As part of that, ICBs are
required to have executive lead roles for children, children with SEND and for
safeguarding (these could be individual roles or combined as part of one role). It is
expected that these executive leads will work with key partners across public health,
social care, justice, and education to ensure the interests of those groups are met,
including appropriate resources are allocated for the provision of services and maintaining
an overview of the quality of services. As part of that process, the Director of Public
Health, informed by the relevant ICB Executive Leads, should ensure that the needs of
children are a key part of the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA) developed by the
Health and Wellbeing Board. Safeguarding partners should use this assessment to help
them understand the prevalence and contexts of need, including specific needs relating to
disabled children and those relating to abuse, neglect and exploitation, which in turn
should help shape services.

Principles for working with parents and carers
18.     In the context of a child-centred approach, all practitioners should work in
partnership with parents and carers as far as possible. Parents and carers need to
understand what is happening, what they can expect from the help and support provided,
what is expected of them and be supported to say what they think. This is particularly
important when there is reasonable cause to suspect that a child is suffering, or is likely to
suffer, significant harm, whether the harm is from inside or outside the home including
online. Working collaboratively will mean parents and carers have the best chance of
making changes, and practitioners can make fair and accurate decisions about how to
support children and keep them safe. While collaborative relationships between
practitioners and, parents and carers are important, the wishes and feelings of the child
and what is in their best interest remain central to decision-making. Practitioners need to
be particularly skilled in engaging and working with parents and carers whom services
have found difficult to engage. Some examples may be parents and carers of disabled
children, parents, and carers whose children are at risk of, or experiencing, harm from
outside the home, fathers, and male carers, and those who are neurodivergent.
Practitioners also need to recognise, engage, and work with parents and carers who are
unwilling or unable to engage with services. Four principles underpin work with parents
and carers:

   1) Effective partnership working with parents and carers happens when practitioners
      build strong, positive, trusting, and co-operative relationships by:




                                             14
            •    approaching families and their wider family networks and communities with
                 empathy, respect, compassion, and creativity
            •    avoiding reinforcing family shame, suffering, and blaming
            •    using strength-based approaches, working with parents and carers to identify
                 what is working well and how their strengths could support them to effect
                 positive change
            •    ensuring they work sensitively with parents, carers, and children, to identify and
                 understand the impact of adversity and trauma in their lives. They seek to
                 understand how adversity and trauma might manifest and affect children and
                 parents’ engagement and use their expertise to adapt their response with care
                 and compassion
            •    adapting their responses to meet the diverse needs of parents and carers,
                 including fathers and male carers, and the specific challenges being faced,
                 including parents and carers of disabled children, and where harm is outside the
                 home 10
            •    ensuring they understand the families’ background, ethnicity, religion, financial
                 situation, ability, education, sex, ages and sexual orientation, and potential
                 barriers these create in seeking and accessing help and support
            •    being alert and recognising where parents or carers may not be acting in the
                 best interest of the child or where children may be experiencing abuse, neglect,
                 and exploitation as a result of actions by parents, carers, or other individuals in
                 their lives. Practitioners use their skills and expertise to adapt their response to
                 secure engagement
            •    being mindful of negative stereotypes when making decisions which might lead
                 to false assumptions
      2) Verbal and non-verbal communication should be respectful, non-blaming, clear,
         inclusive, and adapted to parents and carers needs. Practitioners should ensure
         that all materials provided to children, parents, carers, and families are jargon free,
         developmentally appropriate and in a format that is easily understood. Where
         appropriate, material provided to children, parents, carers, and families should be
         made accessible and translated into their first language if necessary. Professional
         interpreters should be provided where needed. Practitioners should not need to rely
         on family members or partners for interpretation services, including British Sign
         Language.




10
     Multi-agency Practice Principles for responding to child exploitation and extra-familial harm (researchinpractice.org.uk)




                                                                    15
   3) Practitioners empower parents and carers to participate in decision-making to help,
      support and protect children by:
       •   creating a culture of “no surprises”, for example, making parents and carers
           aware of who will attend meetings and discussions, if the child will be invited to
           participate and the format of the meeting or discussion
       •   explaining that parents and carers can bring a family member, a friend or
           supporter to meetings
       •   giving parents and carers adequate preparation at every stage, relevant
           information, a safe and appropriate environment for participation and suitable
           access arrangements
       •   signposting parents and carers to sources of help and support available locally
           or through the local authority
       •   helping parents and carers to understand what the issues are and how these
           impact on the child, what decisions could be made, what changes need to be
           made, why and how, timescales and possible outcomes
   4) Practitioners involve parents, carers, families, and local communities in designing
      processes that affect them, including those focused on safeguarding children. They
      value their contributions, expertise and knowledge reflecting them in service design
      and continuously seek feedback from parents, carers, family networks, children,
      and local communities to inform service improvements. Practitioners use feedback
      from parents and carers to reflect on their own practice.

Expectations for multi-agency working
19.     Strong multi-agency and multi-disciplinary working is vital to identifying and
responding to the needs of children and families. The following expectations have been
developed to underpin this multi-agency working. They apply to all agencies and
practitioners involved in safeguarding and protecting children. Specifically, these include
police, local authorities, health services, probation services, youth offending services,
education providers and childcare settings, and voluntary and third sector
organisations. The term practitioners used here refers to all those working in these
services and settings.

20.   The expectations are structured at three levels for strategic leaders, senior and
middle managers, and direct practice.

21.   Strategic leaders may include Chief Executives of local authorities, Chief
Executives of ICBs, Chief Executives of NHS Trusts, Chief Constables, Police and Crime
Commissioners, and Chief Executives of multi-academy trusts.




                                             16
22.    Senior and middle managers may include Directors of Children’s services, heads of
services and team managers in local authorities, designated and named professionals
(GP, nurse, doctor, midwife) in health, the Chief Superintendent and Chief Inspector (and
equivalents) in police, head teachers, designated safeguarding leads and nursery
managers in education.

23.   Those in direct practice may include frontline social workers, health visitors, police
constables, teachers and those working in the voluntary and community sector.

24.    The professions listed as examples for each level is not exhaustive, decision-
making structures will differ by area, and local areas should consider how best to apply
these standards to match their local approach.

25.       Multi-agency expectations for strategic leaders are as follows:

      •   Collaborate: leaders develop a shared vision for how their services work together
          to deliver shared goals
      •   Learn: leaders use evidence from direct practice in their area so that they know
          and can evaluate what is and isn’t working well for children and families
      •   Resource: leaders are ambitious about helping, supporting, and protecting children
          in their area and jointly prioritise and share resources accordingly
      •   Include: leaders create an inclusive culture where diversity is understood, and
          multi-agency and multi-disciplinary working is celebrated
      •   Mutual challenge: leaders hold each other and their teams to account and are
          held to account by their teams for the quality of the partnership working

26.       Multi-agency expectations for senior and middle managers are as follows:

      •   Collaborate: decisions are based on a shared practice approach and constructive
          debate and analysis of information from all services
      •   Learn: managers ensure their teams have time to engage in peer learning and
          knowledge exchange, peer audit, group supervision and observation
      •   Resource: managers ensure children receive the holistic support they need,
          drawing in expertise from a wide range of agencies
      •   Include: managers support staff to identify and challenge discrimination, disparity,
          and negative stereotypes
      •   Mutual challenge: constructive challenge within and across agencies and
          disciplines is actively encouraged, independent judgements are valued and given
          space alongside collective decision-making to avoid groupthink




                                               17
27.         Multi-agency expectations for direct practice are as follows:

       •   Collaborate: practitioners working with the same child and family share information
           to get a complete picture of what life is like for the child. Collectively, they ensure
           the child’s voice is at the centre and the right support is provided
       •   Learn: practitioners learn together by drawing on the best available evidence from
           their individual fields and sharing their diverse perspectives during regular shared
           reflection on a child’s development, experiences, and outcomes
       •   Resource: practitioners build strong relationships across agencies and disciplines
           to ensure they support and protect the children with whom they work
       •   Include: practitioners recognise the differences between, and are confident to
           respond to, circumstances where children experience adversity due to economic
           and social circumstances and acute family stress, and situations where children
           face harm due to parental abuse and neglect
       •   Mutual challenge: practitioners challenge themselves and each other, question
           each other’s assumptions, and seek to resolve differences of opinion in a
           restorative and respectful way

Information sharing
28.    No single practitioner can have a full picture of a child’s needs and circumstances
so effective sharing of information between practitioners, local organisations and agencies
is essential for early identification of need, assessment, and service provision to keep
children safe. Rapid reviews and child safeguarding practice reviews have highlighted that
missed opportunities to record, understand the significance of, and share information in a
timely manner can have severe consequences for children 11.

29.     Practitioners should be proactive in sharing information as early as possible to help
identify, assess, and respond to risks or concerns about the safety and welfare of
children. This may be when problems are first emerging (for example, persistent school
absences) or where a child is already known to local authority children’s social care.
Sharing information about any adults with whom that child has contact, which may impact
the child’s safety or welfare, is also critical.

30.     Information sharing is also essential for the identification of patterns of behaviour
when a child is at risk of going missing or has gone missing, including being missing from
education. When multiple children appear associated to the same context or locations of
risk, or in relation to children in the secure estate where there may be multiple local




11
     Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel 2021: annual report




                                                                18
authorities involved in a child’s care, it will be for local safeguarding partners to consider
how they build relationships and share relevant information in a timely and proportionate
way with each other, other local organisations, and other safeguarding partnerships.

31.    The Data Protection Act 2018 12 and UK General Data Protection Regulation (UK
GDPR) supports the sharing of relevant information for the purposes of keeping children
safe. Fears about sharing information must not be allowed to stand in the way of
safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children. To ensure effective safeguarding
arrangements:
        •   all organisations and agencies should have arrangements in place that set out
            clearly the processes and the principles for sharing information. The arrangements
            should cover how information will be shared with their own organisation/agency
            and with others who may be involved in a child’s life
        •   practitioners should not assume that someone else will pass on information that
            they think may be critical to keep a child safe. If a practitioner has concerns about
            a child’s welfare or safety, then they should share the information with local
            authority children’s social care and/or the police. All practitioners should be
            particularly alert to the importance of sharing information when a child moves from
            one local authority into another, due to the risk that knowledge pertinent to keeping
            a child safe could be lost
        •   UK GDPR provides a number of bases for sharing personal information. It is not
            necessary to seek consent to share information for the purposes of safeguarding
            and promoting the welfare of a child provided that there is a lawful basis to process
            any personal information required. The legal bases that may be appropriate for
            sharing data in these circumstances could be “legal obligation” or “public task”,
            which includes the performance of a task in the public interest or the exercise of
            official authority. Each of the lawful bases under UK GDPR has different
            requirements 13. In some circumstances, it may be appropriate to obtain consent to
            share data, but it is important to note that UK GDPR sets a high standard for
            consent which is specific, time limited and can be withdrawn (in which case the
            information would have to be deleted)

32.    Practitioners must have due regard to the relevant data protection principles which
allow them to share personal information, as provided for in the Data Protection Act 2018
and UK GDPR. To share information effectively:
       •    practitioners should be confident of the lawful bases and processing conditions
            under the Data Protection Act 2018 and UK GDPR that allow them to store and



12
     Data Protection Act 2018
13
     Lawful basis for processing: Information Commissioner’s Office




                                                                  19
           share information, including information which is considered sensitive, such as
           health data, known under the data protection legislation as “special category
           personal data”
       •   where practitioners need to share special category personal data, for example,
           where information obtained is sensitive and needs more protection, they should
           consider and identify the lawful basis for doing so under Article 6 of UK GDPR, and
           in addition be able to meet one of the specific conditions for processing under
           Article 9. The Data Protection Act 2018 specifies “safeguarding of children and
           individuals at risk” as a processing condition that allows practitioners to share
           information, including without consent (where in the circumstances consent cannot
           be given, it cannot be reasonably expected that a practitioner obtains consent or if
           to gain consent would place a child at risk). However, practitioners should be aware
           of the risks of processing special category data and be mindful that a data
           protection impact assessment must be completed for any type of processing which
           is likely to be high risk 14

33.   Practitioners should aim to be as transparent as possible by telling families what
information they are sharing and with whom, provided that it is safe to do so.




14
     Data protection impact assessments | ICO




                                                20
Common myths that hinder effective information sharing
 Data protection legislation is a barrier to sharing information

 No. The Data Protection Act 2018 and UK GDPR do not prohibit the collection and
 sharing of personal information, but rather provide a framework to ensure that personal
 information is shared appropriately. In particular, the Data Protection Act 2018
 balances the rights of the information subject (the individual whom the information is
 about) and the possible need to share information about them.

 Consent is needed to share personal information

 No, you do not need consent to share personal information. It is one way to comply
 with the data protection legislation but not the only way. UK GDPR provides a number
 of bases for sharing personal information. It is not necessary to seek consent to share
 information for the purposes of safeguarding and promoting the welfare of a child
 provided that there is a lawful basis to process any personal information required. The
 legal bases that may be appropriate for sharing data in these circumstances could be
 ‘legal obligation’, or ‘public task’ which includes the performance of a task in the public
 interest or the exercise of official authority. Each of the lawful bases under UK GDPR
 has different requirements. It is good practice to be transparent and inform
 parents/carers that you are sharing information for these purposes and seek to work
 cooperatively with them, where it is safe to do so.

 Personal information collected by one organisation/agency cannot be disclosed
 to another

 No, this is not the case unless the information is to be used for a purpose incompatible
 with the purpose for which it was originally collected. In the case of children in need, or
 children at risk of significant harm, it is difficult to foresee circumstances where
 information law would be a barrier to sharing personal information with other
 practitioners 15.




15
   Practitioners looking to share information should consider which processing condition in the Data Protection Act 2018 is most
appropriate for use in the particular circumstances of the case. This may be the safeguarding processing condition or another relevant
provision.




                                                                 21
The common law duty of confidence and the Human Rights Act 1998 prevent the
sharing of personal information

No, this is not the case. In addition to the Data Protection Act 2018 and GDPR,
practitioners need to balance the common law duty of confidence and the Human
Rights Act 1998 against the effect on individuals or others of not sharing the
information

IT systems are often a barrier to effective information sharing

There are many IT systems that support the sharing of information, such as the Child
Protection Information Sharing project (CP-IS). It is important that the sector continues
to work with IT suppliers to ensure that their user needs around information sharing
are factored into priorities for system enhancement.




                                           22
Chapter 2: Multi-agency safeguarding arrangements
34.    Protecting children from abuse, neglect and exploitation requires multi-agency join
up and cooperation at all levels. Local organisations and agencies that work with children
and families play a significant and often statutory role when it comes to safeguarding
children.

35.    Many of these organisations and agencies have a duty 16 to ensure their functions
are discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of
children.

36.     The way in which these organisations and agencies work together is known as
multi-agency safeguarding arrangements (MASAs). Robust arrangements help to ensure
that information about a child and their family is shared effectively, risk of harm is correctly
identified and understood, and that children and families receive targeted services that
meet their needs in a co-ordinated way.

37.     Strong, collaborative leadership and timely decision-making are crucial to the
effectiveness of multi-agency working and to identify and address system issues. The
three safeguarding partners are responsible and accountable for this in their local areas.

Safeguarding partners are defined in legislation as follows:

     Safeguarding partners

       A statutory safeguarding partner in relation to a local authority area in England is
       defined under the Children Act 2004 (as amended by the Children and Social Work
       Act, 2017) as:
       (a) the local authority
       (b) an integrated care board for an area any part of which falls within the local
       authority area
       (c) the chief officer of police for an area any part of which falls within the local
       authority area


38.        These three partners have a joint and equal duty 17 to make arrangements to:




16
     Children Act 2004 Section 11
17
     Children Act 2004 Section 16E




                                                 23
      •    work together as a team to safeguard and promote the welfare of all children in a
           local area
      •    include and develop the role of wider local organisations and agencies (see chapter
           2, paragraphs 65-75 on Relevant agencies) in the process.

39.   Every local authority, ICB and constabulary in England must be covered by a multi-
agency safeguarding arrangement 18.

40.     The purpose of multi-agency safeguarding arrangements is to ensure that, at a
local level, organisations and agencies are clear about how they will work together to
safeguard children and promote their welfare. This means:
      •    there is a clear, shared vision for how to improve outcomes for children locally
           across all levels of need and all types of harm
      •    when a child is identified as suffering or likely to suffer significant harm there is a
           prompt, appropriate and effective response to ensure the protection and support of
           the child
      •    organisations and agencies are challenged appropriately, effectively holding one
           another to account
      •    the voice of children and families combined with the knowledge of experienced
           practitioners and insights from data, provides a greater understanding of the areas
           of strength and/or improvement within arrangements and practice
      •    information is sought, analysed, shared, and broken down by protected
           characteristics to facilitate more accurate and timely decision-making for children
           and families, and to understand outcomes for different communities of children
      •    effective collection, sharing and analysis of data, enables early identification of new
           safeguarding risks, issues, emerging threats, and joined-up responses across
           relevant agencies
      •    senior leaders promote and embed a learning culture which supports local services
           to become more reflective and implement changes to practice
      •    senior leaders have a good knowledge and understanding about the quality of local
           practice and its impact on children and families




18
     Children Act 2004 Section 16E




                                                 24
Geography
41.     Although the geographical boundaries for the three safeguarding partners may
differ in size, multi-agency safeguarding arrangements should be based on local authority
areas. Arrangements can cover two or more local authority boundaries by agreement and
where this is in place local authorities can agree to delegate their safeguarding duties to a
single authority 19.

42.    The geographical area of a local multi-agency safeguarding arrangement can be
changed over time. Where changes are proposed, these should be agreed by all
safeguarding partners, communicated clearly to relevant agencies and staff, and reflected
in published arrangements (chapter 2, paragraphs 103-105 on Publication of
arrangements).

43.    As police and health boundaries often cover multiple local authorities, they are
usually part of more than one multi-agency safeguarding arrangement. Reflecting this,
engagement and collaboration through multi-agency safeguarding arrangements can
extend beyond the geographical borders of their local area (for example, regionally or
across different strategic arrangements and boards). There is an expectation that lead
safeguarding partners should decide how best to contribute to the local arrangements
they are responsible for.

44.    There are interdependencies between local arrangements and other strategic
partnership work happening locally to support children and families. This will include but
not be limited to other public boards, including Health and Wellbeing Boards, Adult
Safeguarding Boards, Channel Panels, Improvement Boards, Community Safety
Partnerships, the Local Family Justice Board, Multi-Agency Public Protection
Arrangements (MAPPA) Strategic Management Boards, local drug partnerships, domestic
abuse partnership boards, Corporate Parenting Board, Youth Offending Management
Board and, where relevant, Violence Reduction Units. It is for local areas to decide how
best to coordinate these boards and partnerships to reflect local need.

45.    Local safeguarding arrangements will need to reflect health and care infrastructure
such as ICBs, Integrated Care Systems, local maternity and neonatal systems, provider
collaboratives, primary care networks and NHS specialised commissioning arrangements.

46.    It is particularly important that all partners collaborate to ensure that children are
placed as close to home as possible and are able to continue to access services in their
local area which support their safety and wellbeing.




19
     Children Act 2004 Section 16J




                                              25
Strategic leadership and accountability
47.    Strong, joined-up leadership and clear accountability is critical to effective multi-
agency safeguarding, bringing together the various organisations and agencies. It is
therefore important that the head of each statutory safeguarding partner agency plays an
active role in these arrangements. They (hereafter ‘lead safeguarding partner’ or ‘LSP’)
have been named because they are able to:
       •    speak with authority for the safeguarding partner they represent
       •    take decisions on behalf of their organisation or agency and commit them on policy,
            resourcing, and practice matters
       •    hold their own organisation or agency to account on how effectively they participate
            and implement the local arrangements

48.    The LSPs for safeguarding partners are: Chief Executives of Local Authorities 20,
Chief Executives of the ICBs, and Chief Officers of police forces 21.

49.    Each LSP is responsible for discharging their own statutory and legislative duties to
safeguard and promote the welfare of children. As leaders of their organisations and the
statutory safeguarding partners, it is for LSPs to assure themselves that their local
arrangements are effective and keep children safe. This includes systems of assurance
and accountability within each of their organisations, including inspection findings.

50.     LSPs are jointly responsible for ensuring the proper involvement of and oversight of
all relevant agencies, and should act as a team, as opposed to a voice for their agency
alone. They should meet sufficiently regularly to undertake the following core functions:
Through what mechanism and how often is for local decision.




20
     Head of paid service: Local Government and Housing Act 1989 Section 4
21
     A chief police officer is the most senior police officer in a police force as defined in the Police Act 1996 Section 101




                                                                      26
     Joint functions of lead safeguarding partners
         1. Set the strategic direction, vision, and culture of the local safeguarding
         arrangements, including agreeing and reviewing shared priorities and the resource
         required to deliver services effectively.
         2. Lead their organisation’s individual contribution to the shared priorities, ensuring
         strong governance, accountability, and reporting mechanisms to hold their
         delegates to account for the delivery of agency commitments.
         3. Review and sign off key partnership documents: published multi-agency
         safeguarding arrangements, including plans for independent scrutiny, shared
         annual budget, yearly report, and local threshold document.
         4. Provide shared oversight of learning from independent scrutiny, serious
         incidents, local child safeguarding practice reviews, and national reviews, ensuring
         recommendations are implemented and have a demonstrable impact on practice
         (as set out in the yearly report).
         5. Ensure multi-agency arrangements have the necessary level of business
         support, including intelligence and analytical functions, such as an agreed data set
         providing oversight and a robust understanding of practice.
         6. Ensure all relevant agencies, including education settings, are clear on their role
         and contribution to multi-agency safeguarding arrangements.

51.     LSPs should be clearly named in published arrangements (see chapter 2,
paragraphs 103-105 on Publication of arrangements) and are accountable for the
effectiveness and outcomes of multi-agency safeguarding arrangements in their area.

52.    In cases where the boundaries of the police and ICB extend over multiple local
authority areas, LSPs may decide to meet at a more regional level so they can discuss all
arrangements within their remit and ensure consistency of funding and resources.

53.    LSPs should demonstrate how the experiences of children and families shape the
delivery of local arrangements. They should consider in particular how those with
protected characteristics 22 engage in service design.

54.    The LSP holds responsibility for the implementation of recommendations and
learning from serious incidents, local child safeguarding practice reviews and national
reviews whether or not they originate within their local area, although elements of
monitoring these can be delegated.




22
     Equality Act 2010




                                                 27
55.    Delivery of multi-agency safeguarding functions and processes should be
delegated to enable the LSPs to focus on their joint functions and maintain strategic
oversight.

Delivering multi-agency safeguarding arrangements
56.   Each LSP should appoint a delegated safeguarding partner (DSP) for its agency
who should be named in arrangements.

57.    DSPs 23 should be sufficiently senior to be able to speak with authority, take
decisions on behalf of the LSP and hold their sectors to account. The DSPs should have
the authority to carry out these functions, while ultimate accountability remains with the
LSP as the individual responsible for the delivery of the statutory duties of the
safeguarding partners.

58.    The DSP should have oversight of the quality and compliance of the delivery of
agreed shared priorities. They should have processes in place to provide assurance that
multi-agency practice is reviewed and operating well. Where this is not evident, they
should have the capacity and resource from their own agencies to engage, respond and
improve operational systems and practice.

59.    DSPs and LSPs should have regular interaction and communication to ensure that
the LSP has sufficient oversight and detail on key topics and issues to maintain their
statutory responsibilities. Where a key decision needs to be made that will impact
arrangements and/or services, this should involve the LSP. DSPs should escalate risks
and issues they cannot resolve between them to the LSPs for resolution. This will ensure
that accountability is clear, that strategic decisions are achievable and deliverable, and
that progress is driven at all levels.

60.       DSPs should meet sufficiently frequently to undertake the following joint functions:




23
   For the DSP role, we expect that, for the police, there might need to be delegation based on local context. The responsibilities of the
delegate should be no lower than that of Area Commander, Head of Public Protection or equivalent.




                                                                  28
 Joint functions of delegated safeguarding partners
     1. Delivery and monitoring of multi-agency priorities and procedures to protect and
        safeguard children in the local area, in compliance with published arrangements
        and thresholds.
     2. Close partnership working and engagement with education (at strategic and
        operational level) and other relevant agencies, allowing better identification of
        and response to harm.
     3. The implementation of effective information sharing arrangements between
        agencies, including data sharing that facilitates joint analysis between partner
        agencies.
     4. Delivery of high-quality and timely rapid reviews and local child safeguarding
        practice reviews, with the impact of learning from local and national reviews and
        independent scrutiny clearly evidenced in yearly reports.
     5. The provision of appropriate multi-agency safeguarding professional
        development and training.
     6. Seeking of, and responding to, feedback from children and families about their
        experiences of services and co-designing services to ensure children from
        different communities and groups can access the help and protection they
        need.


61.    To support delivery of these functions, LSPs should appoint one of the DSPs as
the partnership chair for the multi-agency arrangements. This role needs to be jointly
agreed by the LSPs and in doing so given the full backing of all three partners. The role
should be regularly reviewed, and any changes updated in published arrangements. The
role can be rotated between the DSPs if deemed appropriate by LSPs. This is intended to
mirror the joint and equal responsibility for the arrangements and increase shared
understanding of the system. The function should facilitate partner discussions, working in
conjunction with independent scrutiny which provides rigour and challenge.

62.    The purpose of the partnership chair will be to provide greater continuity across
local areas and act as the conduit between the DSPs and LSPs, providing feedback and
escalating collective risk and issues to LSPs as necessary. It will allow for a single point of
contact for the partnership but should not cut across existing formal complaints
procedures. The functions of the partnership chair are separate and distinct from the
functions of independent scrutiny. This arrangement removes any need for a local area to
maintain another chair or independent chair.




                                             29
 Functions of Partnership Chair role

       •    To develop strategic links, support and hold to account all LSPs in fulfilling their
            safeguarding duties for children.
       •    Ensure that local arrangements are designed to work collaboratively and
            effectively by encouraging and supporting the development of partnership
            working between the LSPs, DSPs, independent scrutiny role and MASA sub-
            groups.
       •    Chair the meetings of the DSPs, including any additional meetings convened as
            a response to specific and exceptional circumstances, with the help of the
            business manager and independent scrutiny role.
       •    Offer appropriate challenge to ensure that the partners are accountable, and
            that the local arrangements operate effectively.


63.   Strong leadership and clear accountability are crucial for effective multi-agency
safeguarding arrangements. To strengthen accountability, local safeguarding
arrangements should separate the roles of partnership chair and independent scrutiny
and be clear about the three distinct functions within effective local safeguarding
arrangements:
   •       the partnership chair has authority, is decisive and enables resource allocation,
           with risk escalation to lead safeguarding partners at the executive
   •       a business management function with adequate resources and capacity to support
           the partnership chair
   •       a rigorous and effective independent scrutiny function providing challenge to the
           safeguarding partners (see chapter 2, paragraphs 89-97 on Independent scrutiny)

64.     The DSPs should ensure that, with the support of, the business management and
independent scrutiny function (see chapter 2, paragraphs 89-97 on Independent scrutiny)
the following activities and assurance will be delivered:

   •       oversee and be responsible for the analysis, intelligence, and timely collection of
           data to support functions, such as:
             o getting an accurate local picture of how effectively services are being
               delivered through regular communication across relevant agencies
             o advising the statutory safeguarding partners of the key challenges and
               emerging priorities




                                                 30
              o coordinating the joint multi-agency strategic plan, ensuring that statutory
                safeguarding partners and their delegates feed into and own the plan in the
                local area
              o overseeing the quality of practice and local outcomes for children and families
       •   review and promote consistent understanding and application of referral and
           intervention thresholds across agencies so that the right children receive the right
           support at the right time
       •   coordinate the views of children, and families about the services they receive and
           feed key learning, issues, and good practice to the LSPs
       •   support effective engagement with relevant agencies in their local area so that they
           understand their roles and responsibilities, which includes strengthening the input
           from education providers at operational and strategic level decision-making
       •   use learning from local practice and serious incident notifications to prompt
           reflection and analysis of where improvements need to be secured and action
           taken
       •   strengthen system conditions for effective multi-agency child protection work
       •   chair, attend or be reported to on regular multi-agency operational meetings and
           subgroups, to ensure common threads across the arrangements. Partnerships
           should decide the regularity of meetings at both a LSP and DSP level

Relevant agencies
65.     Relevant agencies are those organisations and agencies whose involvement the
safeguarding partners consider are required to safeguard and promote the welfare of local
children. A list of organisations that meet the criteria to be included as a relevant agency
is set out in regulations 24.

66.     Strong, effective multi-agency safeguarding arrangements should be responsive to
local circumstances and engage the right people in a collaborative way. This approach
requires flexibility from all relevant agencies, to enable joint identification and response to
existing and emerging needs, and to agree priorities to improve outcomes for children.

67.   The LSPs should set out in their published arrangements which organisations and
agencies they require to work with them as relevant agencies. It is expected all local
education and childcare providers working with children up to the age of 18, including




24
     The Child Safeguarding Practice Review and Relevant Agency (England) Regulations 2018




                                                               31
alternative provision, pupil referral units and further education will be included because of
the pivotal role they play in children’s daily lives and amount of time they spend with them.

68.    Early years provision within schools and maintained nurseries are relevant
agencies and help to safeguard some of the most vulnerable children. There are also
other providers such as nurseries and childminders whose role within local arrangements
should be considered. All early years providers should have regard to this guidance and
the Early Years Foundation Stage statutory framework 25. School-aged children may also
attend a childcare setting or an out-of-school activity, and where children are home
educated these settings are particularly significant. Therefore, LSPs should also consider
including voluntary, charity, social enterprise (VCSE) organisations, childcare settings,
and sports clubs in their published arrangements.

69.    Local arrangements are expected to change over time to ensure they continue to
work effectively for children and families, to keep pace with changing demographics and
evolving social and economic challenges. Any changes should be reflected in updated
published arrangements.

70.   When identified by the LSPs as a relevant agency, an organisation must act in
accordance with local safeguarding arrangements 26. As part of this, the organisation
should:
       •    have a clear understanding of its responsibilities in relation to safeguarding children
            locally, and how it will discharge them
       •    co-operate with safeguarding partners to improve, implement, and monitor
            effectiveness of the local safeguarding arrangements
       •    share information and data about safeguarding issues and concerns affecting the
            children involved in their organisation to contribute to local priorities
       •    ensure local multi-agency safeguarding arrangements are fully understood, and
            rigorously applied within their organisation

71.   LSPs should consult with relevant agencies when developing safeguarding
arrangements. This will ensure relevant agencies are aware of the expectations placed on
them. Relevant agencies should actively promote and enforce the arrangements they
have contributed to shaping.

72.   Where a relevant agency has a national remit, such as the British Transport Police
and Cafcass, LSPs should be clear on how these agencies should collaborate, what any




25
     Statutory framework for the early years foundation stage
26 Children’s Act 2004 Section16G (4)




                                                                32
agency’s individual responsibilities are, and how they might contribute towards local
safeguarding arrangements. Where a body or organisation is not named in Relevant
Agency regulations, such as a territorial or special police force, LSPs may still wish to
consider inviting them to contribute to local safeguarding arrangements by agreement.

73.    The published arrangements should set out clearly any contributions agreed with
relevant agencies, including funding and budget contributions, accommodation, services,
and any resources connected with the arrangements.

74.   In setting out how they will work with relevant agencies, the LSPs should be clear
how they will assure themselves that relevant agencies have appropriate, robust
safeguarding policies and procedures in place and how information will be shared
amongst all relevant agencies and the safeguarding partners.

75.    DSPs and relevant agencies should be in regular communication about local multi-
agency safeguarding arrangements and their effectiveness. It is for the LSPs to determine
when their list of relevant agencies should be reviewed. Local safeguarding arrangements
should be shared with and be easily accessible to all partners and relevant agencies.
Relevant agencies should be provided with information about how to escalate concerns
and how any disputes will be resolved. This should include details of the independent
scrutiny and whistleblowing procedures.

Working with schools, colleges, early years, and other
education providers
76.     Schools, colleges, early years and childcare settings, and other educational
providers (including alternative provision) all have a pivotal role to play in safeguarding
children and promoting their welfare. Their insight and co-operation are vital to the
successful delivery of multi-agency safeguarding arrangements. People working in
education settings play an important role in building relationships, identifying concerns
and providing direct support to children. They may be the first trusted adult to whom
children report safeguarding concerns. LSPs should give careful consideration to naming
all local schools, colleges and education providers set out in the 2018 Regulations 27 as
relevant agencies. The statutory guidance ‘Keeping children safe in education’ and ‘Early
years foundation stage (EYFS) statutory framework’ set out the safeguarding duties and
expectations on schools, colleges and other education providers and should be read
alongside this guidance.




27
     The Child Safeguarding Practice Review and Relevant Agency (England) Regulations 2018




                                                               33
77.    LSPs should create an environment which enables all schools 28 (including
independent schools and academy trusts), colleges, early years, and other education and
childcare providers in the local area to be fully engaged, involved and included in local
safeguarding arrangements. This means making sure that the views and contributions of
education and childcare providers are articulated at the highest level of decision-making.
Although it may be challenging for a single education or childcare leader to speak on
behalf of all local providers, LSPs should have an education representative at strategic
discussions representing the education sector. These local leaders will bring insights on
the experiences of children locally, and on how arrangements impact on the education
and childcare system.

78.    Most local multi-agency safeguarding arrangements include systems to ensure
engagement and collaboration at the operational level, such as through education sub-
groups and networks, practitioner forums involving designated safeguarding leads 29, and
nominated education representatives. Some safeguarding partners already recognise the
need to ensure education providers have a voice at the strategic decision-making level
and reflect this in their structures. Published arrangements and yearly reports should
outline how education providers are engaged and consulted with at both the operational
and strategic levels, how this then impacts on decision-making, what it means to be a
relevant agency in their local area, and how they can escalate an issue.

79.      Education providers, including multi-academy trusts, have a responsibility to play
their full part in local safeguarding arrangements, including where their footprint extends
across several local authority areas. This includes, but should not be limited to,
responding to safeguarding audits of quality and compliance 30, as requested by the local
authority and/or local safeguarding partners. This is to ensure that policies are consistent
with the local multi-agency safeguarding arrangements and relevant legislation and/or
regulations. They should also provide staff and governor training that meets local and
national safeguarding requirements 31. Education providers where required should report
their audits to their governing bodies and proprietors to be shared as requested by the
LSPs. Training for designated safeguarding leads and designated teachers should include
shared understanding about different levels of need and how these need to be responded
to. Education providers also play a vital role in sharing and contributing to key information
about children, including attendance data, exclusions, concerns about abuse, neglect,
exploitation, and wider social and environmental factors including extra-familial contexts,
which are a key aspect of keeping children safe.



28
   Statutory guidance Keeping children safe in education defines “all schools” as “maintained, non-maintained or independent schools
(including academies, free schools, and alternative provision academies), maintained nursery schools and pupil referral units”
29
   Named child protection or safeguarding lead: NSPCC Learning
30
   Children Act 2004 Section 11, Education Act 2002 Section 157, Education Act 2002 Section 175, Children and Social Work Act 2017
Section 16H
31
   Keeping children safe in education




                                                               34
80.    Where the LSPs have concerns about the safeguarding arrangements in a school,
independent school or an academy, ‘Schools causing concern’ guidance 32 should be
followed.

81.    Ofsted registered education and childcare providers’ culture and their approach to
safeguarding will be considered as part of all Ofsted inspections. While safeguarding is
not graded separately, Ofsted will always make a written judgement in reports about
whether the arrangements for safeguarding children are effective.

Working with voluntary, charity, social enterprise (VCSE)
organisations and sports clubs
82.     Many voluntary, charity, social enterprise (VCSE) organisations and sports clubs
(see chapter 4 paragraphs 310-315) provide education and activities for children as part
of their work. Similar to staff in schools and colleges, the staff and volunteers working with
children in these settings will often play an important role in building relationships,
identifying concerns, and providing direct support to children; they can often be the first
trusted adult to whom a child reports abuse. Therefore, many of these organisations will
have a crucial role to play in safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children.

83.    LSPs should consider the value of including VCSEs in their local arrangements,
regardless of whether they are named in the 2018 Regulations. Where LSPs choose to
name these organisations as a relevant agency in published local arrangements, it is
important that they are engaged in developing these safeguarding arrangements and,
where applicable, made aware of their statutory duty to co-operate with them. Beyond
these local arrangements, non-statutory guidance ‘Keeping children safe in out-of-school
settings’ 33 sets out the safeguarding arrangements that these providers should have in
place, including expectations on how to manage safeguarding concerns, and the
importance of familiarising themselves with local arrangements and referral routes.

Information requests
84.   Sharing of information between organisations and agencies within a multi-agency
system is essential to improve outcomes for children and their families.

85.   Safeguarding partners may require any person, organisation, or agency to provide
them, any relevant agency for the area, a reviewer or another person, organisation or
agency, with specified information 34. This should be information which enables and



32
   Schools causing concern.
33
   Keeping children safe in out-of-school settings (Using after-school clubs, community activities and tuition: guidance for providers)
34
   Children Act 2004 Section 16H




                                                                   35
assists the LSPs to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in their area, including
local and national child safeguarding practice reviews.

86.   The person or organisation to whom a request is made must comply with such a
request 35. If they do not, safeguarding partners may take legal action against them.

87.    As public authorities, safeguarding partners should be aware of their own
responsibilities under the relevant information law and have regard to guidance provided
by the Information Commissioner’s Office 36 when issuing and responding to requests for
information.

88.   Safeguarding partners should have an agreement in place which outlines how
information is shared safely and effectively between themselves and other relevant
agencies.

Independent scrutiny
89.   Safeguarding partners must ensure that there are arrangements for effective
independent scrutiny in place for their local area.




35
     Children Act 2004 Section 16H (2)
36
     For organisations: Information Commissioner’s Office




                                                            36
 Functions of independent scrutiny role

     •   Provide safeguarding partners and relevant agencies with independent,
         rigorous, and effective support and challenge at both a strategic and
         operational level.
     •   Provide assurance to the whole system in judging the effectiveness of the multi-
         agency safeguarding arrangements through a range of scrutiny methods.
     •   Ensure that statutory duties are being fulfilled, quality assurance mechanisms
         are in place, and that local child safeguarding practice reviews and national
         reviews are analysed, with key learning areas identified and effectively
         implemented across the safeguarding system.
     •   Ensure that the voice of children and families is considered as part of scrutiny
         and that this is at the heart of arrangements through direct feedback, informing
         policy and practice.
     •   Be regarded as a ‘critical friend’ and provide opportunities for two-way
         discussion and reflection between frontline practitioners and leaders. This will
         encourage and enable strong, clear, strategic leadership.
     •   Provide independent advice when there are disagreements between agencies
         and safeguarding partners and facilitate escalation procedures.
     •   Evaluate and contribute to multi-agency safeguarding published arrangements
         and the annual report, alongside feeding into the wider accountability systems
         such as inspections.

90.    Independent scrutiny should drive continuous improvement and provide assurance
that arrangements are working effectively for children, families, and practitioners. It should
also consider learning from local child safeguarding practice reviews, national reviews and
thematic reports. The independent scrutineer or scrutiny group should be able to
demonstrate knowledge, skills and expertise in the area being scrutinised and
consequently add value to the work of local agencies.

91.    Scrutiny should be evidence-based, and feedback should be considered and acted
upon by safeguarding partners. Scrutineers should consider the impact that the LSP and
DSP make through their strategic oversight, if they are providing strong leadership, and
the functioning of local arrangements.

92.     Independent scrutiny contributes to the wider system of accountability which
includes the independent inspectorates’ single agency inspections, including Inspection of
local authority children’s services (ILACS), and Police Forces assessment of their
effectiveness, efficiency, and legitimacy (PEEL), as well as Joint Targeted Area




                                             37
Inspections, National Child Protection Inspections and annual reporting arrangements
(see chapter 2, paragraphs 101-102 on Reporting).

93.    The decision on how best to implement a robust system of independent scrutiny is
to be made locally, and LSPs should be assured that the system in place leads to
objective and rigorous analysis of local arrangements.

94.      Statutory partners and relevant agencies should review progress against agreed
priorities and identify areas for scrutiny, with a focus on achieving outcomes for children.

95.     Scrutiny should be based on sharing and analysis of local and national data,
intelligence, and information. This could include the development of multi-agency
dashboards, joint needs assessments, multi-agency audits, reviews, and mapping of what
is already being scrutinised by the statutory safeguarding partners and relevant agencies,
identifying the gaps and aligning with agreed priorities.

96.    Independent scrutiny can be delivered through a range of methods and structures.
Local areas may choose to have an individual or an externally commissioned group
delivering their scrutiny. Furthermore, scrutiny may be embedded within the structure of
the arrangement or set apart from it. Scrutiny work can be undertaken through interviews,
focus groups, data analysis, observations, and peer review. Scrutiny should take account
of the voice and experience of children and their families.

97.    The approach to independent scrutiny should be clearly set out and accessible.
The published arrangements should state how independent scrutiny is delivered locally
and by whom, how the arrangements are reviewed and how regularly, which areas will be
scrutinised, and how any recommendations will be taken forward. This might include the
process and timescales for ongoing review of the arrangements, and the effectiveness of
learning following serious incidents. In the yearly report, the LSPs should review the
impact and learning from scrutiny and how they are responding to the findings to improve
the effectiveness of arrangements (see chapter 2, paragraphs 101-102 on Reporting).

Funding
98.    The LSP should agree on the level of funding needed to deliver the multi-agency
safeguarding arrangements. This includes consideration of business and analytical
support, independent scrutiny, infrastructure, and core functions including local children
safeguarding practice reviews, multi-agency training and learning events. It is the
responsibility of the LSP to ensure that adequate funding is allocated and spent in line
with agreed priorities.

99.    Funding contributions from the statutory safeguarding partners should be equitable
and agreed by the LSP. Funding for the arrangements should be reviewed on an ongoing
basis to ensure that they can meet the financial needs of the arrangements.



                                             38
100. The funding should be transparent to children and families in the area, and the
individual contributions of safeguarding partners and relevant agencies should be clearly
set out in reporting (see chapter 2, paragraphs 101-102 on Reporting).

Reporting
101. Safeguarding partners should be transparent in how they co-ordinate, deliver and
fund services for children and families locally. In order that others can hold the
safeguarding partners to account there are two mechanisms for reporting on service
delivery and leadership:
       •   publication of arrangements
       •   a yearly report

102.       Both documents should:
       •   be contributed to and signed off by all LSPs
       •   clearly demonstrate the links between them
       •   be easily accessible

Publication of arrangements
103. Once agreed, local multi-agency safeguarding arrangements must 37 be published
and must include:
       •   arrangements for the safeguarding partners to work together to identify and
           respond to the needs of children in the area
       •   arrangements for commissioning and publishing local child safeguarding practice
           reviews (see chapter 5, paragraphs 356-359)
       •   arrangements for independent scrutiny of the effectiveness of the arrangements

104.       They should also include:
       •   who the three safeguarding partners, their delegates and partnership chair are
       •   geographical boundaries, including if the arrangements operate across more than
           one local authority area
       •   the relevant agencies the safeguarding partners will work with, why these
           organisations and agencies have been chosen, and how they will collaborate and
           work together to improve outcomes for children and families




37
     Children Act 2004 Section 16G




                                                39
       •   how all, schools (including independent schools, academies, and free schools),
           colleges, early years and childcare settings, and other educational providers
           (including alternative provision) will be included in the safeguarding arrangements
       •   how any youth custody and residential homes for children will be included in the
           safeguarding arrangements
       •   how the safeguarding partners will share information and data safely and
           effectively, using arrangements that clearly set out the processes and the principles
           for sharing
       •   how the safeguarding partners will use data and intelligence to assess the
           effectiveness of the help being provided to children and families, including early
           help
       •   how multi-agency training will be commissioned, delivered, and monitored for
           impact, and how they will undertake any multi-agency and inter-agency audits
       •   how the arrangements will be funded
       •   the process for undertaking local child safeguarding practice reviews, setting out
           the arrangements for embedding learning across organisations and agencies
       •   how the arrangements will include the voice of children and families, including how
           to escalate concerns and how any disputes will be resolved, including
           whistleblowing procedures
       •   how the local threshold document in place aligns with the arrangements

105. The published arrangements should be easily available and updated when there
are key changes, such as changes to the LSPs, to the yearly priorities or the list of
relevant agencies. Any updates to the published arrangements should be sent to the
Department for Education (safeguarding.reform@education.gov.uk).

Yearly report
106. Safeguarding partners must jointly report on the activity they have undertaken in a
12-month period 38. That reporting should be transparent and easily accessible to families
and professionals. The focus of these reports should be on multi-agency priorities,
learning, impact, evidence, and improvement. Reports must include:
       •   what partnerships have done as a result of the arrangements, including on child
           safeguarding practice reviews




38
     Children Act 2004 Section 16G




                                                40
   •   how effective these arrangements have been in practice

107.   In addition, the report should also include:
   •   the contribution of each safeguarding partner to the functioning and structure of the
       multi-agency safeguarding arrangements
   •   any themes emanating from aggregated methods of scrutiny, for example, reviews
       and scrutineer activity and multi-agency audits
   •   evidence of the impact of the work of the safeguarding partners and relevant
       agencies, including training, on outcomes for children and families
   •   an analysis of any areas where there has been little or no evidence of progress on
       agreed priorities
   •   an analysis of learning from serious incidents
   •   a record of key decisions and actions taken by the safeguarding partners in the
       yearly cycle, including in relation to implementing the recommendations from any
       local and national child safeguarding practice reviews and the impact this has had
   •   ways in which the safeguarding partners have sought and utilised feedback from
       children and families to inform their work and influence service provision
   •   the breakdown of costs in delivering the arrangements for that period, including the
       financial contributions of individual partners, any changes to funding and an
       assessment of the impact and value for money of this funding
   •   evidence of how safeguarding partners are ensuring the adequate representation
       and input of education at both the operational and strategic levels of the
       arrangements
   •   an overview of how data is being used to encourage learning within the
       arrangements and evidence of how information sharing has improved practice and
       outcomes
   •   a review of the impact and learning from independent scrutiny arrangements to
       ensure the leadership is strong and the arrangements are leading to the desired
       and necessary impact
   •   any updates to the published arrangement with the proposed timescale for
       implementation
   •   evidence that national reforms have been implemented, taking into account key
       decisions and actions taken by safeguarding partners in response to reforms, and
       any issues or concerns encountered within the yearly cycle

108. Where there is a secure establishment in a local area, safeguarding partners
should include a review of the use of restraint within that establishment in their report, and



                                             41
the findings of the review should be reported to the Youth Justice Board, the Youth
Custody Service, and His Majesty's Inspectorate of Prisons.

109. Safeguarding partners should make sure the report is widely available. A copy
should be sent to the Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel
(Mailbox.NationalReviewPanel@education.gov.uk), who will review it to identify any
issues that may need escalation to a national level, and the Multi-Agency Safeguarding
Arrangements Unit (Child Protection and Safeguarding Division – DfE)
(safeguarding.reform@education.gov.uk), given its focus on learning, within 7 days of
publication. To allow for consistency across local areas, these should be submitted and
published by the end of September every year, starting from 2024, and should be
reflective of work undertaken the previous financial year (April to March). If partners fail to
submit the yearly report this may be escalated to the Secretary of State.

Dispute resolution process
110. Safeguarding partners and relevant agencies must act in accordance with the
arrangements for their area and will be expected to understand each other’s differences of
views and resolve such differences locally 39. LSPs should therefore agree a system to
resolve disputes and issues between partners within multi-agency safeguarding
arrangements.

111. This may be applied to isolated issues or incidents as well as any intractable
recurring ones.

112. At all stages LSPs and their delegates should make use of key stakeholders in
their local systems, that might include Police and Crime Commissioners (PCCs), Mayors,
lead members, and/or independent persons, who can be brought to the table to assist
them to settle on a solution.

113. If the issue remains unresolved between the three safeguarding partners and their
local networks the next stage of escalation is to the Secretary of State.




39
     Children and Social Work Act 2017 Section 16G (4)




                                                         42
Chapter 3: Providing help, support and protection
114. All families can face challenges that make parenting difficult. Often families are
able to overcome challenges themselves or with the help of relatives, friends and
services, such as schools, youth services, health visiting and mental health services.
However, sometimes families will have more significant needs that require more intensive
help and support.

115. This chapter outlines how agencies, organisations and individuals work together to
provide help, support, and protection in early help 40, through statutory services under
section 17 of the Children Act 1989 41 and through section 47 of the Children Act 1989 42
(child protection enquires and processes).

Local criteria for providing help, support, and protection
116. Safeguarding partners should agree with their relevant agencies the criteria for
different levels of assessment to inform which services are commissioned and delivered in
their local area and ensure that the right help is given to children at the right time. This
should include services for children who have suffered or are likely to suffer abuse,
neglect, and exploitation whether from within or outside the home. This should also
include a range of appropriate services for disabled children and be aligned with the short
breaks services statement 43.

117. The safeguarding partners should publish a threshold document, which sets out the
local criteria for action in a way that is transparent, evidence-based, accessible, and easily
understood. This should include:
     •    the process for early help assessments, and the type and level of early help and
          targeted early help services to be provided under sections 10 and 11 of the
          Children Act 2004 44




40
   Early help is a system of support which aims to support children and families as soon as problems emerge. Some early help support
is described as ‘targeted early help’ and is provided to children and families who are identified by practitioners to have multiple or
complex needs requiring a specialist and/or multi-agency response but where statutory intervention is not needed.
41
   Child in need refers to the statutory support provided under section 17 of the Children Act 1989 for a child who is unlikely to reach or
maintain a satisfactory level of health or development, or their health or development will be significantly impaired without the provision
of children’s social care services, or the child is disabled. The duty to provide support is on the local authority.
42
   Under section 47 of the Children Act 1989, where a child is the subject of an emergency protection order or is in police protection or
there is reasonable cause to suspect that a child who lives, or is found, in their area is suffering or is likely to suffer, significant harm,
the local authority must make or cause to be made enquiries to decide if any action must be taken to safeguard or promote the child’s
welfare.
43
   Required under the Breaks for Carers of Disabled Children Regulations 2011
44
   The Children Act 2004 Section 10 requires each local authority to make arrangements to promote co-operation between the
authority, each of the authority’s relevant partners and such other persons or bodies working with children in the local authority’s area
as the authority considers appropriate. Section 11 places duties on a range of organisations and individuals to give regard to the need
to safeguard and promote the welfare of children.




                                                                    43
     •    the criteria, including the level of need, for when a case should be referred to local
          authority children’s social care for assessment and for statutory services under:
          o section 17 of the Children Act 1989 (children in need, including how this applies
            for disabled children)
          o section 47 of the Children Act 1989 (reasonable cause to suspect a child is
            suffering or likely to suffer significant harm)
          o section 31 of the Children Act 1989 (care and supervision orders)
          o section 20 of the Children Act 1989 (duty to accommodate a child)
     •    clear procedures and processes for cases relating to:
          o the abuse, neglect, and exploitation of children
          o children managed within the youth secure estate
          o disabled children

Section 1: Early help
118. Early help is support for children of all ages that improves a family’s resilience and
outcomes or reduces the chance of a problem getting worse. It is not an individual
service, but a system of support delivered by local authorities and their partners working
together and taking collective responsibility to provide the right provision in their area.
Some early help is provided through “universal services” 45, such as education and health
services. They are universal services because they are available to all families, regardless
of their needs. Other early help services are coordinated by a local authority and/or their
partners to address specific concerns within a family and can be described as targeted
early help. Examples of these include parenting support, mental health support, youth
services, youth offending teams and housing and employment services. Early help may
be appropriate for children and families who have several needs, or whose circumstances
might make them more vulnerable. It is a voluntary approach, requiring the family’s
consent to receive support and services offered. These may be provided before and/or
after statutory intervention.

119. The Early Help System Guide 46 provides a toolkit to assist local strategic
partnerships responsible for their early help system in their area. Effective provision relies
upon local organisations and agencies working together to:
     •    identify children and families who would benefit from early help




45
   Universal services are available to all children and families. They are provided by a range of agencies such as health and education.
GPs, health visitors and school nurses are some examples of this type of service provision.
46
   Early Help System Guide




                                                                 44
     •    undertake an assessment of the need for early help which considers the needs of
          all members of the family
     •    ensure good ongoing communication, for example, through regular meetings
          between practitioners who are working with the family
     •    co-ordinate and/or provide support as part of a plan to improve outcomes. This plan
          will be designed together with the child and family, and updated as and when the
          child and family needs change
     •    engage effectively with families and their family network, making use of family
          group decision-making, such as family group conferences, 47 to help meet the
          needs of the child 48

120. A lead practitioner should co-ordinate the activity around the family, ensure the
assessment and the family plan responds to all needs identified, and lead on ensuring the
family co-produce the plan. The plan might include the family network. The time
commitment to deliver this role will vary family by family depending on the complexity of
their needs. Where appropriate, local authorities should engage families, including
children, to have a say in who their lead practitioner is, and have a process in place to
collate feedback on their relationship with them.

121. The lead practitioner role could be held by a range of people. More details about
which practitioners may act as a lead practitioner, their roles and responsibilities along
with additional guidance, are provided in the Early Help System Guide 49.

Identifying children and families who would benefit from help
122. Local organisations and agencies should have in place effective ways to identify
emerging problems and potential unmet needs of individual children and families. Local
authorities should work with organisations and agencies to develop joined-up early help
services, which can be delivered through a Family Hub model where they exist, based on
a clear understanding of local needs. Local authorities should use the Joint Strategic
Needs Assessment (JSNA) 50 to inform their early help offer.

123. Multi-agency and multi-disciplinary training will be important in supporting this
collective understanding of the demographics and needs of the local community, the local
practice framework, and the services available to support children. All practitioners



47
   Family group decision-making is the umbrella term for a family-led forum where a family network makes a plan in response to
concerns about a child’s safety or wellbeing. These can take different forms; family group conferences are one model of family group
decision-making. The Department for Education does not prescribe a specific model. There is further information in the glossary.
48
   The statutory guidance on court orders and pre-proceedings for local authorities (2014) highlights that family group conferences are
an important means of involving the family early to avoid the creation of barriers between the local authority and the family.
49
   Early Help System Guide
50
   Joint strategic needs assessment and joint health and wellbeing strategies explained




                                                                 45
working with children and families, including those in universal services and those
providing services to adults with children, need to understand their role in identifying
emerging problems. They need appropriate training so that they:

     •   know when to share information with other practitioners and what action to take to
         support early identification and assessment
     •   are able to identify and recognise all forms of abuse, neglect, and exploitation
     •   have an understanding of domestic and sexual abuse 51, including controlling and
         coercive behaviour as well as parental conflict that is frequent, intense, and
         unresolved
     •   are aware of new and emerging threats, including online harm, grooming, sexual
         exploitation, criminal exploitation, radicalisation, and the role of technology and
         social media in presenting harm
     •   are aware that a child and their family may be experiencing multiple needs at the
         same time

124.      Practitioners should be alert to the potential need for early help for a child who:
     •   is disabled
     •   has special educational needs (whether or not they have a statutory education,
         health and care (EHC) plan)
     •   is a young carer
     •   is bereaved
     •   is showing signs of being drawn into anti-social or criminal behaviour, including
         being affected by gangs and county lines and organised crime groups and/or
         serious violence, including knife crime
     •   is frequently missing/goes missing from care or from home 52
     •   is at risk of modern slavery, trafficking, sexual and/or criminal exploitation
     •   is at risk of being radicalised 53
     •   is viewing problematic and/or inappropriate online content (for example, linked to
         violence), or developing inappropriate relationships online




51
   See Appendix A: Glossary for the statutory definition of domestic abuse set out in the Domestic Abuse Act 2021
52
   Children who run away or go missing from home or care (2014)
53
   Managing risk of radicalisation in your education setting




                                                                46
     •    is in a family circumstance presenting challenges for the child, such as drug and
          alcohol misuse, adult mental health issues and domestic abuse 54
     •    is misusing drugs or alcohol themselves
     •    is suffering from mental ill health
     •    has returned home to their family from care
     •    is a privately fostered child 55
     •    has a parent or carer in custody 56
     •    is missing education 57, or persistently absent from school, or not in receipt of full-
          time education
     •    has experienced multiple suspensions and is at risk of, or has been permanently
          excluded

The role of education and childcare settings
125. All children aged 5 to 16 are legally entitled to a full-time education, suitable to any
special educational need. Education is essential for children’s progress, wellbeing and
wider development and being in school is a protective factor against wider harms,
including exploitation. Where children are not receiving education, either because they
persistently missing school, or are not registered at a school and not receiving a suitable
education otherwise, this could be a possible indicator of neglect, abuse or exploitation or
could in itself constitute neglect in severe and sustained cases.

126. Young people aged 16 and 17, including those with special and educational needs
and disabilities, are required to participate in education or training until they reach their
18th birthday. They are entitled to an offer of a suitable place in education or training under
the September guarantee 58. Local authorities are therefore expected to identify and pay
particular attention to young people who are not in education, employment or training or
whose current activity is not known.




54
    The Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Section 3 recognises children as victims of domestic abuse in their own right when they see, hear or
experience domestic abuse perpetrated by a parent, those with parental responsibility, or a relative.
55
    Private fostering occurs when a child under the age of 16 (or under 18, if disabled) is provided with care and accommodation by a
person who is not a parent, person with parental responsibility for them or a relative in their own home. A child is not privately fostered
if the person caring for and accommodating them has done so for less than 28 days and does not intend to do so for longer. This term
is also used in Championing Kinship Care: The National Kinship Care Strategy, capturing private fostering arrangements as a type of
kinship care. It holds the same meaning, but applies only to individuals, excluding organisations or bodies.
56
    Farmer review for women (2019) found that children impacted by maternal imprisonment are more likely to leave their family home
and be separated from their primary carer, resulting in significant disruption to their lives.
57
    Children missing education: statutory guidance for local authorities
58
    September guarantee: education and training for young people




                                                                   47
127. Local authorities also have a statutory duty to secure sufficient suitable education
and training provision for all young people aged 16 to 19 and for those up to age 25 with a
learning difficulty assessment or, EHC plan, in their area 59. They should make available to
young people aged 13 to 19 and to those up to the age of 25 with a learning difficulty
assessment or EHC plan, support that will encourage, enable or assist them to participate
in education or training 60.

128. As education and childcare settings have daily contact with most children and
families, they are uniquely placed to identify concerns and, with partners as appropriate,
address them early. Safeguarding professionals, including safeguarding partners and their
delegates, should work closely with education and childcare settings to ensure information
about children is shared effectively, risks of harm are correctly identified and understood,
and children and families receive the services they need. This includes, but is not limited
to, information, such as increased absence or mental health problems, which may be
indicators that a child has suffered or is at risk of suffering neglect, abuse, and
exploitation.

129. Those working in education and childcare settings need to be aware of how
children’s experiences can impact on their mental health, behaviour, attendance and
progress at nursery, school, or college. Where children have suffered abuse, neglect and
exploitation, or other potentially traumatic adverse childhood experiences, this can have a
lasting impact throughout childhood, adolescence and into adulthood 61.

130. It is important that relevant information where children are home educated is
shared between local authorities, schools, colleges, and other relevant partners. Parents
have a right to educate their children at home providing the education is suitable 62. When
a child of school age is not a registered pupil at a school and is not receiving suitable
education at home, this could be an indicator of neglect, abuse, or exploitation. Schools
must notify the local authority of a child’s removal from the school roll 63 at a non-standard




59
   Education Act 1996 Sections 15ZA and 18A as inserted by the Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Act 2009, and
amended by the Children and Families Act 2014
60
   Education and Skills Act (ESA) 2008 Section 68
61
   An example of where schools and local police forces work together successfully to better support and safeguard children after
experiencing domestic abuse, is through the Operation Encompass notification scheme. Operation Encompass works by directly
connecting the police with schools. When officers have attended a domestic abuse incident, police share the information with a
school’s trained Designated Safeguarding Lead (DSL) before the start of the next school day, so that school staff can provide
appropriate emotional and practical support at the earliest opportunity to children affected by domestic abuse
62
   The Education Act 1996 Section 436A (3) defines “suitable education” as efficient full-time education suitable to age, ability and
aptitude and to any special educational needs
63
   The Education (Pupil Registration) (England) Regulations 2006, as amended by The Education (Pupil Registration) (England)
(Amendment) Regulations 2016




                                                                  48
transition point 64, and they should also share information on a child’s circumstances,
especially if already known to children’s social care or if they have an EHC plan 65.

Effective assessment of the need for early help
131. Where a child and family would benefit from co-ordinated support from more than
one organisation or agency (for example, education, health, housing) there should be a
multi-agency assessment. These assessments should:

     •    be undertaken with the agreement of the child and their parents or carers, involving
          the child and family as well as all the practitioners who are working with them
     •    take account of the child’s wishes and feelings wherever possible which could
          include providing advocacy support where this is needed to enable a child to share
          their views, for example, if the child has communication difficulties due to a
          disability
     •    take account of the child’s age, family circumstances and extra-familial contexts 66
          and whether these factors are contributing to or preventing good outcomes
     •    take account of the needs of all members of the family as individuals and consider
          how their needs impact on one another which includes considering needs relating
          to education, early years development, mental health and physical health,
          substance misuse, financial stability, housing, family relationships, domestic abuse
          and crime as described in the Supporting Families Outcomes Framework 67.
          Practitioners should be aware of situations where there has been a breakdown in
          relationship between the child and their family and engaging the whole family may
          not be appropriate
     •    cover both presenting needs and any underlying issues with the understanding that
          a family’s needs can change overtime, for example, when a child moves up to
          secondary school
     •    be based on facts, and explore and build on strengths
     •    be clear about the action to be taken and services to be provided
     •    identify what help the child and family require to prevent needs escalating




64
   Education (Pupil Registration) (England) Regulations 2006 Regulation 12
65
   Education, health and care (EHC) plans identify educational, health and social needs and set out the additional support to meet
those needs. Further guidance on EHC plans can be found at https://www.GOV.UK/children-with-special-educational-needs
66
   See Appendix A: glossary
67
   Supporting families programme guidance, 2022 to 2025: chapter 3, Supporting families outcomes framework




                                                                 49
     •   provide the basis for any future assessments if they are needed, for example,
         under sections 17 and 47 of the Children Act 1989

132. Practitioners should have consideration for specific needs, including, but not
exclusive to, family members who may have learning difficulties/disabilities or those
whose first language is not English, are care experienced, young parents 68, fathers or
male carers, and parents who identify as LGBT.

133. If a family does not consent to an early help assessment, practitioners should seek
to understand why this is the case, so that they can provide reassurance to the family
about their concerns. They should ensure the family has understood the consensual
nature of support, and range of services available to meet their needs. The practitioner
should consider how the needs of the child could otherwise be met, for example, through
provision by universal services that the family already engages with. Practitioners should
still inform individuals that their data will be recorded and shared, and the purpose of this
explained to them. If a family has chosen not to engage with support in the past, this
should not act as a barrier to them accessing support in the future. If at any time it is
considered that the child may be a child in need, as defined in the Children Act 1989, a
referral should be made to children’s social care. Practitioners should ensure that the
family has understood that the support and services provided under section 17 of the
Children Act 1989 are consensual. If there are concerns that the child has suffered
significant harm or is likely to do so, a referral should be made immediately to local
authority children’s social care.

Provision of effective services to help families
134. Local areas should have a comprehensive range of effective services. They should
reflect any local assessment of need, including the JSNA and the latest evidence of the
effectiveness of early help programmes 69. Good practice should also ensure effective join-
up between specific local early help services and universal services to ensure families can
seamlessly transition from universal to more specialist support should a specific need be
identified. There should be an explicit link to the local area’s offer of short breaks for
disabled children, as well as suitably adjusted services to support parents. Evidence
should be collated to show their impact, including on those with a particular protected
characteristic.

135. Specific local early help services typically include family and parenting
programmes, assistance with school attendance, assistance with health issues including




68
   Our young parents project - The Lullaby Trust describes a young parent as someone under the age of 25
69
   What Works Centre for Children & Families) (Foundations). See Home | EIF Guidebook and Interventions with established evidence
of preventing, stopping or reducing the impact of child abuse and neglect and related risks




                                                              50
mental health, enabling financial stability, supporting secure housing, responses to
emerging concerns in extra-familial contexts, responding to a parent in custody, and help
for emerging problems relating to domestic abuse, drug or alcohol misuse. Local
approaches to delivering these services will vary but could include using a family hub
model. Family hubs are a place-based way of joining-up in the planning and delivery of
family support services, offering a universal access point for children and families.

136. Early help services may also focus on improving family functioning and building the
family’s own capability to establish positive routines and solve problems. This should be
done within a structured, evidence-based practice framework, which is shared across the
early help partnership and involves regular review to ensure that real progress is being
made. Where family networks are supporting the child and parents, it might be
appropriate to use family group decision-making to support work with the family. Some of
these services may be delivered directly to parents but should always be evaluated to
demonstrate the impact they are having on the outcomes for the child.

137. The Early Help System Guide provides operational guidance on the delivery of
whole family working in the early help system. Local areas should have agreed a set of
measures at family, cohort, demand, and population level to evidence the effectiveness of
early help, looking particularly at whether whole family need has been addressed and how
family voice has informed services. This enables shared responsibility for improved
outcomes, recognising that no one organisation delivers a specific outcome on their own.

Section 2: Safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children
138. Local authorities have statutory duties to support certain groups of children in their
area. Under section 17 of the Children Act 1989, local authorities are under a general duty
to provide support for children who are unlikely to reach or maintain a satisfactory level of
health or development, or their health or development will be significantly impaired without
the provision of services, or the child is disabled. Where there is reasonable cause to
suspect a child is suffering or likely to suffer significant harm, local authorities must make
enquiries and decide if any action must be taken under section 47 of the Children Act
1989.

139. Where requested to do so by local authority children’s social care, health
organisations, other local authorities and other parts of the local authority, such as
housing, have a duty to co-operate under section 27 of the Children Act 1989 70 by
assisting the local authority in carrying out its children’s social care functions, provided
that this is compatible with their own duties and obligations and does not interfere with the




70
  Children Act 1989 Section 27 (2): an authority whose help is so requested shall comply with the request if it is compatible with their
own statutory or other duties and obligations and does not unduly prejudice the discharge of any of their functions.




                                                                  51
performance of their own functions. Any cooperation from health bodies should be in line
with their professional regulations and standards on competence. Local authorities can
also ask other agencies to assist in the delivery of support and services under section 17
of the Children Act 1989, but those agencies are under no obligation to do so.

140. Whilst the duty to deliver support and services under section 17 of the Children Act
1989 is with the local authority, other safeguarding partners may play a critical role in the
delivery of services for children and their families. Local safeguarding partners are
responsible for setting the strategic direction, vision, and culture of the local multi-agency
safeguarding arrangements, including agreeing and reviewing shared priorities, and the
resources required to deliver services effectively. More information can be found under
‘Strategic leadership and accountability’ and ‘Delivering multi-agency safeguarding
arrangements’ in chapter 2.




                                             52
Statutory requirements for children in need
 Under the Children Act 1989, local authorities are under a general duty to provide
 services for children in need for the purposes of safeguarding and promoting their
 welfare. A child in need is defined under section 17 of the Children Act 1989 as a child
 who is unlikely to achieve or maintain a reasonable level of health or development, or
 whose health and development is likely to be significantly or further impaired without
 the provision of services, or a child who is disabled.
 To fulfil this duty, practitioners undertake assessments of the needs of individual
 children, giving due regard to a child’s age and understanding when determining what,
 if any, services to provide.
 Every assessment must be informed by the views of the child as well as the family,
 and a child’s wishes and feelings must be sought regarding the provision of services
 to be delivered. Where possible, children should be seen alone. Where a child
 requests to be seen with a trusted adult, this should be supported. A child’s
 communication needs should be taken into account. When assessing children in need
 and providing services, specialist assessments may be required and, where possible,
 should be co-ordinated so that the child and family experience a coherent process and
 a single plan of action.
 Some children in need may require accommodation because there is no one who has
 parental responsibility for them, they are lost or abandoned, or the person who has
 been caring for them is prevented from providing them with suitable accommodation
 or care. Under section 20 of the Children Act 1989, the local authority has a duty to
 accommodate such children in need in their area.
 Under section 47 of the Children Act 1989, where a local authority has reasonable
 cause to suspect that a child who lives or is found in their area is suffering or is likely
 to suffer significant harm, it has a duty to make such enquiries as it considers
 necessary to decide whether to take any action to safeguard or promote the child’s
 welfare. Such enquiries, supported by other organisations and agencies, as
 appropriate, should be initiated where there are concerns about all forms of abuse,
 neglect, and exploitation whether this is taking place in person or online, inside or
 outside of the child’s home.
 There may be a need for immediate protection whilst an assessment or enquiries are
 carried out. Further information about immediate protection can be found in this
 guidance on page 85.


Local protocols for assessment and support
141. Local authorities, with their safeguarding partners and any relevant agencies,
should develop, agree, and publish local protocols for assessments and support. This



                                              53
protocol should reflect the local practice framework for work with children and their
families. The local authority is publicly accountable for this protocol and all organisations
and agencies have a responsibility to understand it. A local protocol should:
     •   be consistent with the requirements of this statutory guidance
     •   set out clear arrangements for how cases will be managed once a child is referred
         into local authority children’s social care
     •   set out who can act as a lead practitioner in supporting children and their families
         under section 17, and reflect that the decision about who will act as lead
         practitioner will be made in line with practitioner knowledge and skills, resources,
         commissioned service requirements, relevant professional standards as
         appropriate 71 and accountabilities
     •   set out the skills, knowledge, experience, and competence required for the lead
         practitioner role and how this will be monitored locally
     •   set out clearly the governance arrangements to support effective decision-making,
         including roles, responsibilities, and accountabilities, and how these take account
         of high-level risk, risks that are dynamic and/or complex.
     •   set out the process for case audits and accountability including allocation of lead
         practitioners and decision-making. Information should be included in the yearly
         report (see chapter 2, paragraphs 106-109) on the evidence of impact on outcomes
         for children and families, to show progress and learning that has occurred following
         audits.
     •   clarify how organisations, agencies and practitioners undertaking assessments and
         providing services can work in partnership including when sharing and seeking
         information
     •   set out how and when organisations and agencies should communicate with
         children and families
     •   set out the process for challenge by children and families by publishing the
         complaints procedures 72
142. Local protocols should also reflect the specific needs of certain groups, including
but not limited to young carers, children with special educational needs and/or disabilities
(including to inform and be informed by EHC plans), unborn children where there are
concerns, children in hospital, children in mental health inpatient settings, children with




71
   For example, the Social Work England Professional Standards - Professional standards - Social Work England or the Nursing and
Midwifery Council’s Code - Professional standards of practice and behaviour for nurses, midwives and nursing associates
72
   Including as specified under the Children Act 1989 Section 26 (3) and the Children Act 1989 Representations Procedure (England)
Regulations 2006




                                                               54
specific communication needs, asylum seeking children, children considered at risk of
exploitation and harm outside the home (including serious violence and association with
organised crime groups), children at risk of female genital mutilation, children who are in
the youth justice system, children with a parent in custody, children in kinship care, and
children returning home from care.

143. Where a child needs other assessments and support, it is important that these are
co-ordinated so that the child does not become lost between different organisational
procedures. Where a child has had previous assessments and support, information from
these should help practitioners build a complete picture of the child and their family,
including any support and services that have been provided.

144. Within the local authority, practice leaders are qualified social workers with day-to-
day operational responsibility across the whole system for child and family social work
practice, ensuring it operates effectively and overseeing child and family frontline social
work practitioners and leaders. This is often the Assistant Director of Children’s Social
Care or equivalent. Child and family principal social workers support social work teams,
provide quality assurance, and contribute to strategic leadership. Practice supervisors are
experienced social workers whose primary responsibility is to supervise the practice and
decision-making of child and family social work practitioners, and to develop the skills of
individuals and teams.

145. Principal Social Workers, practice supervisors and practice leaders should support
practitioners, the local authority, and partners in further developing their assessment
practice and decision-making skills, and the practice methodology that underpins this.

Purpose of assessment
146.     The purpose of children’s social care assessments is to:
     •   gather important information about a child and family
     •   analyse their needs and/or the nature and level of any risk and harm being suffered
         by the child, including where harm or risk of harm is from outside the home 73
     •   decide whether the child is a child in need (section 17) or is suffering or likely to
         suffer significant harm (section 47)
     •   provide support to address those needs to improve the child’s outcomes and
         welfare and where necessary to make them safe




73
  See chapter 3, section 2, paragraph 196 on what a good assessment should consider when supporting children at risk of, or
experiencing, harm outside the home




                                                               55
       •    identify support from within the family network

147.        Action to meet a child's needs can begin even before assessment has concluded.

Assessment framework
148. Research has shown that taking a systematic approach to enquiries using a
conceptual model is the best way to deliver a comprehensive assessment for all children.
An example of such a model is set out in the diagram below. It investigates three
domains:
       •    the child’s developmental needs
       •    the capacity of parents or carers (resident and non-resident) and any other adults
            living in the household to respond to those needs 74 75
       •    the impact and influence of the family network and any other adults living in the
            household as well as community and environmental circumstances




74
     An assessment of the support needs of parent carers of disabled children may be required
75
     See chapter 4, paragraph 253 on adults with parental responsibility for disabled children




                                                                  56
                                                          Health                         Basic care

                                                    Education                               Ensuring safety

                                          Emotional and                  The child             Emotional warmth
                                            behavioural
                                           development                  Safeguarding             Stimulation
                                                                            and
                                             Identity                    promoting                    Guidance and
                                                                           welfare                    boundaries
                               Family and social
                                  relationships                                                           Stability

                             Social presentation

                              Self-care skills
                                                           Family and environmental factors




                                                          Figure 1: Assessment framework

Referral
149. Local authority children’s social care has the responsibility for clarifying the process
for referrals in their area. This includes specific arrangements for referrals in areas where
there are secure youth establishments. As well as protocols for practitioners working with
children and families, contact details should be signposted clearly so that children,
parents, other family members and community partners 76 are aware of who they can
contact if they wish to make a referral, require advice or support.

150. Anyone who has concerns about a child’s welfare should consider whether a
referral needs to be made to local authority children’s social care and should do so
immediately if there is a concern that the child is suffering significant harm or is likely to do
so. Where a child is admitted to a mental health facility, practitioners should make a
referral to local authority children’s social care. When practitioners refer a child, they
should include any information they have on the child’s developmental needs, the
capacity of the child’s parents, carers, or family network to meet those needs and any
external factors that may be undermining their capacity to parent. This information may be
included in any assessment, including an early help assessment, which may have been



76
  Community partners include those working in voluntary, private, and statutory organisations who may come into contact with or be
aware of the presence of children as they carry out their day-to-day roles in the community, for example, business owners, youth
workers, faith and community leaders, park wardens.




                                                                   57
carried out prior to a referral into local authority children’s social care. An early help
assessment is not a prerequisite for a referral but where one has been undertaken, it
should be used to support the referral.

151. Feedback should be given by local authority children’s social care to the referrer on
the decisions taken. Where appropriate, this feedback should include the reasons why a
case may not meet the statutory threshold and offer suggestions for other sources of
more suitable support. Practitioners should always follow up their concerns if they are not
satisfied with the local authority children’s social care response and should escalate their
concerns in line with local procedures if they remain dissatisfied.

Timeliness
152. The speed with which an assessment is carried out after a child’s case has been
referred into local authority children’s social care should be determined by the needs of
the individual child and the nature and level of any risk of harm they face. This will require
judgements to be made by a social work qualified practice supervisor or manager on each
individual case. Adult assessments, for example, parent carer or non-parent carer
assessments, should also be carried out in a timely manner.

153. Within one working day of a referral being received, local authority children’s social
care should acknowledge receipt to the referrer and a social work qualified practice
supervisor or manager should decide next steps and the type of response required. This
will include determining whether:

   •   the child requires immediate protection and urgent action is required
   •   the child is in need and should be assessed under section 17 of the Children Act
       1989
   •   there is reasonable cause to suspect that the child is suffering or likely to suffer
       significant harm, and whether enquiries must be made, and the child assessed
       under section 47 of the Children Act 1989
   •   any immediate services are required urgently by the child and family and what type
       of services
   •   further specialist assessments are required to help the local authority to decide
       what further action to take
   •   to see the child as soon as possible if the decision is taken that the referral requires
       further assessment




                                              58
154. For children in need of immediate protection, action must be taken by the local
authority, the police (including British Transport Police) or the NSPCC 77 if removal is
required. This should happen as soon as possible after the referral has been made to
local authority children’s social care 78 79.

155. The maximum timeframe for the assessment to conclude, such that it is possible to
reach a decision on next steps, should be no longer than 45 working days from the point
of referral. If, in discussion with a child and their family and other practitioners, an
assessment exceeds 45 working days, the lead practitioner should record the reasons for
exceeding the time limit. In some cases, the needs of the child will mean that a quick
assessment will be required. In all cases, as practitioners identify needs during the
assessment, they do not need to wait until the assessment concludes before providing
support or commissioning services to support the child and their family.

Provision of support and services for a child in need
156. Once the referral has been accepted by local authority children’s social care, a
social work qualified practice supervisor or manager should decide, with partners where
appropriate, who the most appropriate lead practitioner will be and with the lead
practitioner’s agreement, allocate them in line with the local protocol.

157. The lead practitioner role can be held by a range of people, including social
workers. When allocating the lead practitioner, local authorities and their partners should
consider the needs of the child and their family to ensure the lead practitioner has the time
required to undertake the role. The lead practitioner should have the skills, knowledge,
competence, and experience to work effectively with the child and their family. The lead
practitioner should always be a social worker for child protection enquiries.

158. Lead practitioners should have access to high quality supervision. Effective
supervision can play a critical role in ensuring a clear focus on a child’s welfare and
support practitioners to reflect critically on the impact of their decisions on the child and
their family. All lead practitioners should also continue to receive appropriate supervision
and support for continuing professional development and to maintain professional
registration, where appropriate, within their existing line management arrangements.

159. The responsibility for providing support and services remains with the local
authority. Decision-making responsibilities, including the lead practitioner and social work




77
   National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
78
   Children Act 1989 Section 44
79
   Children Act 1989 Section 46




                                                                 59
qualified practice supervisor or manager should be set out in the local protocols (see
chapter 3, section 2, paragraph 141)

160.        In response to the referral, the lead practitioner should:

       •    clarify with the referrer, when known, the nature of the concerns and how and why
            they have arisen
       •    make clear to children and families how the assessment will be carried out and
            when they can expect a decision on next steps
       •    inform the child and family of the action to be taken, unless a decision is taken on
            the basis that this may jeopardise a police investigation or place the child at risk of
            significant harm

Focusing on the needs of the child and their family
161. Assessments should be child-centred and responsive to the voice of the child. This
means decisions should be made in the child’s best interests, rooted in child
development, age-appropriate, sensitive to the impact of adversity and trauma and
informed by evidence. Observation can be an important way to get the perspective of
babies, infants, and non-verbal children. In the case of disabled children, practitioners
should consider whether any specialist communication support is required and consider
how advocacy services can support the child to communicate their views.

162.        In addition, assessments should:
       •    be focused on action and outcomes for children
       •    be multi-agency and multi-disciplinary, based on information gathered from relevant
            practitioners and agencies 80, and drawing in the relevant expertise
       •    be discussed with the child and their parents or carers, as appropriate
       •    build a full picture of all aspects of a child’s and their family’s life, including their
            strengths and interests as well as any previous referrals and interventions
       •    be holistic in approach and address presenting and underlying issues and each of
            the child’s needs, giving sufficient recognition and priority to the specific needs of
            disabled children and young carers 81 and to any risks the child faces within or
            outside the home, including online




80
     For example, teachers, early years workers, health practitioners, youth justice practitioners, the police and adult social care.
81
     Recognised, valued and supported: next steps for the carers strategy (2010).




                                                                     60
     •    explore the needs of all members of the family 82 as individuals and consider how
          their needs impact on one another as well as how the family network could support
          and help de-escalate issues 83
     •    be a dynamic process, not an event, analysing and responding to the changing
          nature and level of need and/or risk faced by the child from within and outside their
          family
     •    recognise and respect the individual and protected characteristics of families,
          including the ways in which these can overlap and intersect, ensuring support
          reflects their diversity of needs and experiences
     •    lead to action, including the provision of services, the impact of which is reviewed
          on an ongoing basis
     •    recognise a child’s entitlement to a full-time education and the positive impact
          attendance at school has on personal development and attainment

163. Where there are concerns that a child may be at risk of, or experiencing harm
outside the home, assessments should include work with the child, parents, carers, family
networks and partners 84 to determine:
     •    the nature and duration of the harm
     •    where risk is located and understand the context in which harm is or may be
          happening, including online
     •    the level of risk associated with each concern and context identified

164. Assessments should consider how a child’s experience within their family and
networks, including their friends and peer groups, and extra-familial contexts, such as the
places and spaces where they spend their time, interplay with the risk of harm outside of
the home. 85

165. Where the child has links to a foreign country 86, the lead practitioner may also need
to work with embassies and colleagues abroad 87.




82
   An assessment of the support needs of parent carers, or non-parent carers, of disabled children may be required
83
   Family and friends care: statutory guidance for local authorities (2010), paragraph 4.37
84
   This can include safeguarding partners and community partners (such as those working in voluntary, private and statutory
organisations who may come into contact with or be aware of the presence of children as they carry out their day-to-day roles in the
community – for example, business owners, youth workers, faith and community leaders, park wardens).
85
   See chapter 3, section 2, paragraphs 194-199 on supporting children at risk of, or experiencing, harm outside the home
86
   A child with links to a foreign country may be a foreign national child, a child with dual nationality or a British child of foreign
parents/national origin
87
   Further guidance can be found in Working with foreign authorities: child protection and care orders (2014)




                                                                  61
166. The lead practitioner should meet families and go on home visits as needed, when
undertaking assessments. The social work qualified practice supervisor or manager
should undertake joint visits where this is appropriate.

167. Where a child becomes looked after, the assessment will be the baseline for work
with the family. Assessment by a social worker is also required before a looked after child
under a care order returns home 88. This will provide evidence of whether the necessary
improvements have been made to ensure the child's safety when they return home.
Following an assessment, appropriate support should be provided for children returning
home, including where that return home is unplanned, to ensure that children continue to
be adequately safeguarded.

Analysis and decision-making
168. The analysis and decision-making should be a collaborative process between the
lead practitioner and the multi-agency team working with the family, including the social
work qualified practice supervisor or manager.

169. No system can fully eliminate harm. Understanding harm involves judgement and
balance. These are central to effective analysis of the relevant information gathered as
part of the assessment. Analysis should build upon the history of every child, taking
account of family history and the child’s experience of cumulative abuse, neglect, and
exploitation as well as the impact of any previous services. Where a child has been
looked after and has returned home, information from previous assessments and case
records should also be reviewed.

170. This information should be used by practitioners to get as comprehensive an
understanding as possible of the level of need, and actual or likely significant harm being
faced by a child, taking into account the child’s perspective of the protective and risk
factors they are facing. This should include factors both inside and outside the home.

171. Practitioners’ analysis should be supplemented and challenged by others working
in the multi-agency team, including the social work qualified practice supervisor or
manager, with the family and/or in their teams and management chain. Critical reflection
through supervision should further strengthen the analysis.

172. Practitioners should also be alert to a desire to think the best of adults and to hope
they can overcome their difficulties. This should not subvert the need to protect children
from chaotic, abusive, and neglectful homes. Practitioners should always reflect the latest
research on the impact of abuse, neglect, and exploitation, and relevant findings from




88
     The Care Planning, Placement and Case Review (England) Regulations 2010.




                                                              62
serious case and practice reviews when analysing the level of need and risk faced by the
child. This should be reflected in the case recording.

173. Decisions on the nature and level of the child’s needs, and the level of actual or
likely significant harm, if any, should be reviewed by a social work qualified practice
supervisor or manager.

174. Decisions over what support to provide a child and family should be multi-agency,
taken with the best interests of the child in mind, informed by the evidence available, and
underpinned by knowledge of child development. Regular decision and review points
should be held, involving the child and family and relevant practitioners to ensure that help
is given in a timely and appropriate way, and that the impact of this help on the child’s
outcomes and welfare is evaluated and changed as needed. Decisions should be agreed
by the lead practitioner and the multi-agency team working with the family, including the
social work qualified practice supervisor or manager.

175. Judgements may need to be revised as a case progresses and further information
comes to light. It is a characteristic of skilled practice that practitioners revisit their
assumptions in the light of new evidence and take action to revise their decisions in the
best interests of the individual child.

176. Decisions about whether looked after children can return home will rest on whether
the needs that were previously identified have been addressed. This may include
instances where harm from outside the home means the child has been placed out of
area to ensure their immediate safety. In these cases, the lead practitioner will be a social
worker who should work with partners to take the decision about how to keep the child
safe following the return to their family. Local authorities should set out what support and
services will be provided following reunification and ensure the child and parents
understand who to contact for support. Local authorities may also consider whether family
group decision-making would support the child’s transition home from care, and the role
the family network could play in supporting this.

Focusing on outcomes
177. Where local authority children’s social care involvement is continued, the lead
practitioner develops a plan of action with the child and family, and in partnership with the
multi-agency team which includes the social work qualified practice supervisor or
manager, in line with local protocols. The plan should set out which services are to be




                                             63
delivered, and what actions are to be undertaken, by whom and for what purpose. A
child’s engagement with education should be reflected in the plan 89.

178. Many services provided will be for parents or carers (and may include services
identified in a parent carer’s or non-parent carer’s needs assessment) 90. Where this is the
case, the plan should reflect this and set clear measurable outcomes for the child and
expectations for the parents, with measurable, reviewable actions for them.

179. Under section 17 of the Children Act 1989, local authorities may provide financial
support to family networks to support the plan. Any financial support provided will be
subject to review in terms of supporting agreed improved outcomes for the child.

180. In cases where there are concerns of harm outside of the home, the plan should
ensure the parents and carers are supported to understand what is happening to the
child. This should take a strengths-based approach to support parents to meet the child’s
needs. Practitioners should be aware that parents may feel blamed or criticised in these
circumstances and will need to work thoughtfully with parents to build effective
partnerships.

181. The plan should be reviewed regularly to analyse whether sufficient progress has
been made to meet the child’s needs. This will be important for neglect cases where
parents and carers can make small improvements. In such cases, the test should be
whether any improvements in adult behaviour are sufficient and sustained. Practitioners
should consider the need for further action and record their decisions. The review points
should be agreed with other practitioners supporting the child, including the social work
qualified practice supervisor or manager, and focus on any change to their welfare.

182. The social work qualified practice supervisor or manager should continue to meet
families and go on joint home visits as needed to review the plan for the child. They
should work in partnership to ensure help given is leading to a significant positive change
for the child and consider whether the pace of that change is appropriate for the child.
Practitioners working with children should always have access to appropriate colleagues
to talk through their concerns and judgements affecting the welfare of the child.

183. This review should also consider how the family network is supporting the parent or
carers to sustain improvements and whether any further support could be offered.

184. Practitioners should consider if a family group decision-making forum is appropriate
to determine the help and support the family network can provide for the child. Local



89
   Attendance below 90% is classed as persistent absence and requires targeted support by schools and local authority school
attendance teams, where appropriate. Further details are available in Working together to improve school attendance
90
   Children Act 1989 Section 17ZD and Carers (Recognition and Services) Act 1995 Section 1




                                                               64
authorities should consider referring the family to a family group decision-making service if
they believe there is a possibility the child may not be able to remain with their parents or
carers, or in any event before a child becomes looked after, unless this would be a risk to
the child. If family group decision-making cannot be conducted at this point, the local
authority should still consider this as an option later, including as a route to reunification
with the birth parents or family network where appropriate.

185. Family group decision-making, including the family group conference model,
promotes the involvement of the family network in decision-making about a child’s safety
or wellbeing. Family group decision-making forums offer a way of ensuring that all
resources within the family’s wider networks have been engaged for the benefit of the
child and empower family networks to come to a decision on how this can be done.
Family group decision-making is an entirely voluntary process for the family and requires
informed consent. This should be a family-led forum, where a family network has all the
resources, adequate preparation, relevant information, a safe and appropriate
environment, and “private family time” to make a plan to respond to concerns about a
child’s safety or wellbeing. At pre-proceedings stage, a successful family group decision-
making forum, such as a family group conference, also include having an independent
coordinator 91.

186. Known transition points for the child should be planned for in advance. This
includes where children are likely to transition between child and adult services, where
they move from one local authority to another and where they move between schools.

Supporting disabled children and their carers
187. A crucial role of children’s social care is to provide help and support to disabled
children and their families. When undertaking an assessment of a disabled child,
practitioners should recognise the additional pressures on the family, and the distinct
challenges they may have had to negotiate as a result of their child’s disability.

188. The assessment process should focus on the needs of the child and family, be
strengths-based, and gather information to inform decisions on the help needed to:

       •   ensure the child achieves the best possible outcomes
       •   enable the child’s family to continue in their caring role where that is right for the
           child
       •   safeguard children in cases where there is abuse, neglect, and exploitation




91
     Court Orders and Pre-proceedings guidance 2014




                                                      65
     •   ensure that appropriate practical support is in place to enable disabled children and
         their families to thrive

189. The local authority must also consider whether it is necessary to provide support
under section 2 of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970 92. Where a local
authority is satisfied that the identified services and assistance can be provided under
section 2 of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970, and it is necessary in
order to meet a disabled child’s needs, it must arrange to provide that support. Where a
local authority is assessing the needs of a disabled child, a carer of that child may also
require the local authority to undertake an assessment of their ability to provide, or to
continue to provide, care for the child, under section 1 of the Carers (Recognition and
Services) Act 1995. The local authority must take account of the results of any such
assessment when deciding whether to provide services to the disabled child.

190. If a local authority considers that a parent carer of a disabled child may have
support needs, it must carry out an assessment under section 17ZD of the Children Act
1989. The local authority must also carry out such an assessment if a parent carer
requests one. Such an assessment must consider whether it is appropriate for the parent
carer to provide, or continue to provide, care for the disabled child. The assessment
should also take account of parent carer’s needs and wishes, and the specific needs and
circumstances of the child resulting from their disability. Parent carers have the right to
request an assessment under section 17ZD of the Children Act 1989 93, including where a
child is not otherwise known to children’s social care. Local authorities must ensure they
have a process to facilitate these assessments if requested.

191. In line with the commitments made in the Special Educational Needs and
Alternative Provision Improvement Plan 94, local authorities are encouraged to implement
the role of Designated Social Care Officer (DSCO) in each local area. The DSCO will
provide the capacity and expertise to improve the links between social care services and
the SEND system. Similar to the Designated Clinical Officer (DCO) or Designated Medical
Officer (DMO) role in health, the DSCO role will support both operational input (such as
the contributions from care to education, health and care assessments) and more
strategic planning functions (such as the commissioning of care services such as short
breaks) for disabled children and those with SEN.




92
   Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970 Section 2
93
   Children Act 1989 Section 17ZD
94
   Special Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND) and Alternative Provision (AP) Improvement Plan




                                                              66
Supporting young carers
192. If a local authority considers that a young carer (see glossary) may have support
needs, it must carry out an assessment under section 17ZA of the Children Act 1989 95 to
establish how best they can support the young carer and their family. The local authority
must also carry out such an assessment if a young carer, or the parent of a young carer,
requests one. Such an assessment must consider whether it is appropriate or excessive
for the young carer to provide care for the person in question, (which may be a sibling,
parent, or other member of the family), in light of the young carer’s needs and wishes. The
Young Carers (Needs Assessment) Regulations 2015 96 require local authorities to look at
the needs of the whole family when carrying out a young carer’s needs assessment. Local
authorities must consider whether to combine a young carer’s needs assessment with any
other assessment of the needs for support of the young carer, the person cared for, or a
member of the young carer’s family.

193. Information on whether a child has been identified as a young carer will be
collected annually through the school census from January 2023. Schools do not need to
obtain parental or pupil consent to provide this information for the purposes of the census
but should respect the wishes and feelings of both children and their parents.

Supporting children at risk of, or experiencing, harm outside
the home
194. Some children experience abuse and exploitation outside the home. This is often
referred to as “extra-familial harm” 97. Harm can occur in a range of extra-familial contexts,
including school and other educational settings, peer groups, or within community/public
spaces, and/or online. Children may experience this type of harm from other children
and/or from adults. Forms of extra-familial harm include exploitation by criminal and
organised crime groups and individuals (such as county lines and financial exploitation),
serious violence, modern slavery and trafficking, online harm, sexual exploitation, teenage
relationship abuse, and the influences of extremism which could lead to radicalisation 98 99.
Children of all ages can experience extra-familial harm.

195. Where there are concerns that a child is experiencing extra-familial harm,
practitioners should consider all the needs and vulnerabilities of the child. Some children




95
   Children Act 1989 Section 17ZA
96
   The Young Carers (Needs Assessment) Regulations 2015
97
   See Appendix A: glossary
98
   Extremist groups may make use of the internet to radicalise and recruit and to promote extremist materials. Any potential harmful
effects to individuals identified as vulnerable to extremist ideologies or being drawn into terrorism should also be considered. For
further information see Prevent duty guidance
99
   Links to further guidance on forms of extra-familial harm, including child criminal exploitation (such as county lines), child sexual
exploitation and radicalisation are available in Appendix B




                                                                   67
will have vulnerabilities that can be exploited by others and will require support
appropriate to their needs to minimise the potential for exploitation. All children, including
those who may be causing harm to others, should receive a safeguarding response first
and practitioners should work with them to understand their experiences and what will
reduce the likelihood of harm to themselves and others.

196. Where children may be experiencing extra-familial harm, children’s social care
assessments should determine whether a child is in need under section 17 of the Children
Act 1989 or whether to make enquires under section 47 of the same Act, following
concerns that the child is suffering or likely to suffer significant harm 100. A good
assessment should:
      •   build an understanding of the child’s strengths, interests, identity, and culture
      •   respond to each of the vulnerabilities and/or challenges that the child may be
          facing, including any within the home
      •   gather information on past experiences of trauma and how this may impact on the
          child’s current experience of harm and on how they interact with practitioners
      •   explore how the child's experiences within their families and networks, including
          their friends and peer groups, interplay with the risk of harm outside of the home
          and identify what needs to change 101
      •   support parents, carers, and family networks to understand what is happening to
          the child, working with them to ensure they can best meet the child’s needs and
          play an active part in the solutions and processes to help create safety for the child
      •   understand the risk of extra-familial harm for siblings, for example, where older
          children are exploited, younger siblings may also be at risk of being targeted

197. Where there are concerns that more than one child may be experiencing harm in
an extra-familial context, practitioners should consider the individual needs of each child
as well as work with the group. The children in the group may or may not already be
known to local authority children’s social care. Working with the whole group enables
practitioners to build an understanding of the dynamics between those within the group
and the extra-familial context.

198. Practitioners will need to build an understanding of the context in which the harm is
occurring and draw on relevant knowledge and information from the children and wider




100
   See chapter 3, section 2, paragraph 146 on Purpose of assessment
101
    For some children, a safe and loving family environment is not enough to protect them from these risks. For others, problems which
exist within the home, such as abuse and neglect, could mean they are more vulnerable to exploitation and extra-familial harm




                                                                68
partners 102 in order to decide on the most appropriate interventions. Practitioners should
consider the influence of groups or individuals perpetrating harm, including where this
takes place online, and identify patterns of harm, risk and protective factors in these
contexts. This may include working across safeguarding and community safety
partnerships 103 to agree a plan for keeping children safe 104.

199. Key decisions should be recorded and communicated to both the child and their
parents or carers, so that everyone understands the action that has, or will be, taken to
safeguard and promote their welfare. It is important that all partners are clear how actions
contribute to safeguarding and promoting the welfare of the child 105.

The National Referral Mechanism

200. The National Referral Mechanism (NRM) is the UK’s system for identifying victims
of modern slavery and human trafficking. If a first responder 106 has concerns that a child
may be a potential victim of modern slavery or human trafficking (including through county
lines) then a referral should be made to the NRM, as soon as possible. A child’s consent
is not needed for a referral to be made 107.

201. Independent Child Trafficking Guardians (ICTG) are an independent source of
advice for children who have been trafficked and somebody who can speak up on their
behalf. Where the ICTG service has been implemented 108, if the first responder considers
a child to be a potential victim of modern slavery or human trafficking, they should refer
them to the ICTG service. This is in addition to following usual safeguarding routes and
NRM referrals. The NRM referral and ICTG referral should be made in parallel.

Supporting children in secure youth establishments
202. Any assessment of children in secure youth establishments should take account of
their specific needs. In all cases, the local authority in which a secure youth establishment
is located is responsible for the safety and welfare of the children in that establishment.



102
    This can include safeguarding partners and community partners (such as those working in voluntary, private and statutory
organisations who may come into contact with or be aware of the presence of children as they carry out their day-to-day roles in the
community, for example, business owners, youth workers, faith and community leaders, park wardens
103
    Community safety partnerships: Local Government Association
104
    Working across safeguarding and community safety partnerships may also provide opportunity to identify and seek to disrupt those
that are causing harm to the child to prevent further abuse and/or exploitation
105
    Further guidance and supportive resources on suggested approaches to create safe spaces and places for children in response to
extra-familial harm is available at Appendix B: Multi-agency practice principles for responding to child exploitation and extra-familial
harm (non-statutory guidance for local areas)
106
    First responders work for designated organisations and help identify and support potential victims of modern slavery.
107
    Further information on the National Referral Mechanism, including a list of first responder organisations can be found at National
Referral Mechanism guidance: adult (England and Wales)
108
    First responders should consult the: Interim guidance for Independent Child-Trafficking Guardians for further guidance and for a list
of sites with current ICTG coverage. Public authorities should give due regard to all ICTG functions, as would be required by
regulations made under section 48 (6) (e)(i) and section 48 (6) ( e ) (ii) of the Modern Slavery Act 2015,noting that section 48 of the
Modern Slavery Act has not yet been commenced.




                                                                  69
The host local authority should work with the governor, director, manager or principal of
the secure youth establishment and the child’s home local authority, their relevant youth
offending team and, where appropriate, the Youth Custody Service 109 to ensure that the
child has a single, comprehensive support plan.

203. Where a child becomes looked after, as a result of being remanded to youth
detention accommodation (YDA), the local authority should visit the child and assess the
child’s needs before taking a decision on how they should be supported 110. This
information should be used to prepare the care plan, which should set out how the YDA
and other practitioners will meet the child’s needs whilst the child remains remanded, and
at any point of transition they will experience (either returning to the community or upon
receiving a custodial sentence). The care plan 111 must be reviewed in the same way as a
care plan for any other looked after child 112.

Supporting children in mother and baby units
204. When a woman applies for a place on a mother and baby unit (MBU) (see chapter
4), a referral for assessment must be requested by the prison from children’s social care
in the mother’s home authority 113. Any assessment should set out the needs of the child in
relation to the mother’s application to be placed on an MBU. The assessment should
consider:
      •   suitability of the placement in safeguarding and promoting the welfare of the child,
          including the needs of the child and any risk
      •   impact of the placement on the child’s development, health, and wellbeing
      •   contact arrangements with the family and family network
      •   suitability and arrangements for the child’s care if the placement is not granted,
          including within the family network through a kinship care arrangement

205. The lead practitioner responsible for the assessment should attend the MBU
Admissions Board to represent the best interests of the child. When placed in an MBU,
the mother retains full parental responsibility for the day-to-day care of the child and the
local authority in which the prison is located is responsible for safeguarding and promoting
the welfare of the child.




109
     As the placing authority
110
     Promoting the health and well-being of looked-after children
111
     The Care Planning, Placement and Case Review (England) Regulations 2010 Regulation 4
112
     Following the Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 all children remanded by a court in criminal proceedings
will be looked after.
113
     Pregnancy, Mother and Baby Units (MBUs), and Maternal Separation from Children up to the Age of Two in Women’s Prisons




                                                                70
Supporting children at risk from people in prison and people
supervised by the Probation Service
206. The Prison Service undertakes a child safeguarding enquiry 114 with children’s
social care for all newly sentenced prisoners and will identify prisoners who present an
ongoing risk to children from within custody. Prisons will also decide on the level of
contact, if any, they will allow between a prisoner and a child based on a child contact risk
assessment 115 and will prohibit or restrict a prisoner’s contact with a child where
necessary.

207.      In response to a child safeguarding enquiry, children's social care should:
      •   review information provided by the Prison Service and record it as required
      •   respond to a child safeguarding enquiry and share with the Prison Service any
          concerns about the prisoner and any contact with a child
      •   contribute to the prisons’ child contact risk assessment where a child is known to
          children's social care, or has previously been known, by providing a report on the
          child's best interests and verifying the child's identity. Where the child is not known
          to children’s social care, they should still provide a view on child contact and should
          advise the prison to complete a child safeguarding referral if one is required

208. The Probation Service will share information with children’s social care about
supervised individuals who have contact with children or who pose a known risk and will
also request information by making child safeguarding enquiries. Information exchange
between probation and children’s social care help both agencies develop a better
understanding of the children and families they work with and ensures risk assessments
are accurate and well informed.

209. Under the UKGDPR and Data Protection Act 2018 sharing of personal information
of an offender must be lawful and fair and must comply with Part 3 of the Data Protection
Act 2018 and in particular the data protection principles. Sharing of information for the
purposes of law enforcement and keeping children and young people safe meets one of
the requirements for lawful processing under the Data Protection Act 2018 as the data
sharing is authorised by law (under section 325(3) and (4) of the Criminal Justice Act
2003) (or section 14 of the Offender Management Act 2007). It is therefore not necessary
for Prison and Probation Service staff to obtain consent from the offender under the Data
Protection Act 2018.




114
    The HMPPS Child Safeguarding Policy Framework sets out that a child safeguarding enquiry (sometimes referred to as a
safeguarding check) is an official enquiry that HMPPS staff send to local authority children’s social care to request information on an
individual, child or family.
115
    The child contact risk assessment process is explained in Chapter 5b of the Public Protection Manual (PPM) PSI 18/2016.




                                                                  71
210.   For information exchange to be effective, children’s social care should:
   •   explore arrangements with their local Probation Delivery Unit who have resources
       to support the timely provision of information in response to child safeguarding
       enquiries, including same day responses, where delay may negatively impact on a
       child. This may involve sharing information relating to a child, family, or offender
       who children’s social care may currently or historically know
   •   reflect the voice of the child in information shared with the Probation Service, where
       appropriate
   •   be prepared to offer the Probation Service a view on decisions in the child’s best
       interest

211. The following descriptors and flow charts set out the steps that practitioners should
take when working together to assess and provide services for children who may be in
need and when children are returning home to their families.




                                            72
Assessment, support and planning for children under the
Children Act 1989
Following acceptance of a referral by local authority children’s social care, a social
work qualified practice supervisor or manager should initiate a multi-agency
assessment under section 17 of the Children Act 1989. The assessment should be led
by a lead practitioner and approved by a social work qualified practice supervisor or
manager. Local authorities have a duty to ascertain the child’s wishes and feelings
and take account of them when planning the provision of services. Assessments
should be carried out in a timely manner reflecting the needs of the individual child, as
set out in this chapter.

Where the local authority children’s social care decides to provide services, a multi-
agency child in need plan should be developed which sets out which organisations
and agencies will provide which services to the child and family. The plan should set
clear measurable outcomes for the child and expectations for the parents. The plan
should reflect the positive aspects of the family situation as well as the weaknesses,
acknowledging any factors beyond the family that may be undermining their capacity
to parent or keep their child safe.

Where a child in need has moved permanently to another local authority area, the
original local authority should ensure that all relevant information (including the child in
need plan) is shared with the receiving local authority as soon as possible. The
receiving local authority should consider whether support services are still required
and discuss with the child and family what might be needed, based on a timely re-
assessment of the child’s needs, as set out in this chapter. Support should continue to
be provided by the original local authority in the intervening period. The receiving local
authority should work with the original local authority to ensure that any changes to the
services and support provided are managed carefully.

Where a child in need is approaching 18 years of age, this transition point should be
planned for in advance. This includes where children are likely to transition between
child and adult services.

Where information gathered during an assessment result in the lead practitioner and
social work qualified practice supervisor or manager suspecting that the child is
suffering or likely to suffer significant harm, the local authority should hold a strategy
discussion to enable it to decide, with other agencies, whether it must initiate enquiries
under section 47 of the Children Act 1989.




                                            73
Purpose:
Assessments should determine whether the child is in need, the nature of any
services required and whether any specialist assessments should be undertaken to
assist the local authority in its decision-making.
A social work qualified practice supervisor or manager should:

   •   agree with partners who the most appropriate lead practitioner should be and
       allocate them
   •   approve the lead practitioner’s assessment
   •   review and approve the plan for the child
   •   meet families and attend home visits where that is appropriate
The lead practitioner should:

   •   lead on an assessment and complete it in line with the locally agreed protocol
       according to the child’s needs and within 45 working days from the point of
       referral into local authority children’s social care
   •   see the child within a timescale that is appropriate to the nature of the concerns
       expressed at referral, according to an agreed plan
   •   conduct interviews with the child and family members, separately and together
       as appropriate. Initial discussions with the child should be conducted in a way
       that minimises distress to them and maximises the likelihood that they will
       provide accurate and complete information, avoiding leading or suggestive
       questions
   •   record the assessment findings and decisions and next steps following the
       assessment
   •   inform, in writing, all the relevant agencies and the family of their decisions and,
       if the child is a child in need, of the plan for providing support
   •   inform the referrer of what action has been or will be taken




                                            74
The police should:
   •   assist other organisations and agencies to carry out their responsibilities where
       there are concerns about the child’s welfare, providing information about the
       child and family drawing on individual and organisational knowledge and
       expertise to strengthen any plan to safeguard and promote the welfare of the
       child
   •   be involved in assessments where crimes have been committed, where their
       expertise is required to identify whether a crime has been committed and where
       crimes may be committed in the future. These investigations might be reactive
       (where there is evidence to suggest a crime has been committed) or proactive
       (where further activity is required to establish if a crime has occurred)
All involved practitioners should:
   •   be involved in the assessment and provide further information about the child
       and family
   •   agree further action, including what services would help the child and family,
       and inform local authority children’s social care if any immediate action is
       required
   •   seek advice and guidance as required and in line with local practice guidance




                                           75
Flow chart 1: Action taken when a child is referred to local
authority children’s social care

                                    A child’s case is referred
                              to local authority children’s social care




     Local authority children’s social care
         acknowledges the referral.
  A social work qualified practice supervisor              Local authority children’s social care
   or manager decides on the next course                     informs the referrer about the
      of action within one working day.                      next course of action, including
      With partners, they agree who the                      where there is no further action
         lead practitioner should be.                             for the local authority
   The lead practitioner should always be a
  social worker for child protection enquiries.




             The lead practitioner makes an assessment
            under section 17 or 47 of the Children Act 1989
                (refer to flow chart 4 on assessment)




                                                                                   If the lead practitioner
                               They decide
                                                        They decide                 assesses that other
     They have                    further
                                                      no further local                      action
      concerns              assessment is
                                                          authority                     is necessary,
      about the                 necessary
                                                     children's social                they refer the child
 child’s immediate                (refer to
                                                     care involvement                  and their family to
   safety (refer to          flow chart 4 on
                                                      is necessary at                     early help
   flow chart 3 on             assessment,
                                                       this stage, but                   assessment
      immediate             and flow chart 5
                                                      other action may                   or help from
      protection)               on strategy
                                                        be necessary                    universal and
                                discussion)
                                                                                     targeted services




                                                   76
Looked after children returning home to their families
      Where the decision to return a child to the care of their family is planned, the local
      authority should undertake an assessment while the child is looked after as part of
      the care planning process (under regulation 39 of the Care Planning Regulations
      2010). This assessment should consider what services and support the child and
      their family might need. Family group decision-making, such as family group
      conferences, could also be used to establish how the family network will support the
      child to return home. The outcome of this assessment should be included in the
      child’s care plan. The decision to cease to look after a child will, in most cases,
      require approval under regulation 39 of the Care Planning Regulations 2010.
      Practitioners must carry out an assessment of need for eligible children 116 to consider
      their eligibility for independence and transition into adulthood.

      Where a child who is accommodated under section 20 of the Children Act 1989
      returns home in an unplanned way, (for example, the decision is not made as part of
      the care planning process, but the parent removes the child, or the child decides to
      leave), the local authority should work with partners to consider whether there are
      any immediate concerns about the safety and wellbeing of the child. This could
      include harm from outside the home. The local authority should take appropriate
      action, including making enquiries under section 47 of the Children Act 1989, if there
      is concern that the child is suffering or likely to suffer significant harm.

      There should be a clear plan for all children who return home that reflects current and
      previous assessments, focuses on outcomes, and includes details of services and
      support required. Following reunification:

       •   practitioners should make the timeline and decision-making process for
           providing ongoing services and support clear to the child and family
       •   when reviewing outcomes, children should, wherever possible, be seen alone.
           Practitioners have a duty to ascertain their wishes and feelings regarding the
           provision of services being delivered

      The impact of services and support should be monitored and recorded, and where a
      child is remanded to local authority or youth detention accommodation, consideration
      must be given to what ongoing support and accommodation the child may need after
      their period of remand 117. This should be included in their care plan.




116
    Where the child is an eligible child, regulation 42 of the Care Planning, Placement and Case Review (England) Regulations 2010
applies.
117
    The Children Act 1989 Guidance and Regulations Volume 2: Care, planning, placement and case review paragraph 8.20




                                                                77
Flow chart 2: Looked after children returning home to their
families

             Local authority children’s social care reviews a looked after child’s case under the
                  Care Planning, Placement and Case Review (England) Regulations 2010




                                          It decides that the child
                                             will be placed with
                                                their parents
                                              as the subject of               It continues to assess
          It decides that the
                                                a care order                   the most appropriate
        plan of permanence
                                                                               plan for permanence
       in the child’s care plan
                                                                                 and/or whether the
           should be for the
                                                                                 child should remain
        child to return home                The child remains a                      looked after
                                             looked after child
                                         but lives with their family
                                           (regulations 15 to 20)



                                                            If the family removes the
      It makes an assessment                        child from the looked after placement
      under regulation 39 and                           provided under section 20 of the
     includes in the child’s care                               Children Act 1989 or
    plan the advice, assistance                            the child decides to leave
     and support it will provide
    after the child returns home
                                         Local authority children’s           Local authority children’s
                                         social care has concerns           social care has no concerns
                                       about the child’s immediate          about the child’s immediate
       It approves its decision         safety (refer to flow chart 3        safety (refer to flow chart 4
    that the child will cease to         on immediate protection)                  on assessment)
       be looked after under
      regulation 39, reflecting
            the outcome of
       its assessment and the              It reviews the care plan
         details set out in the                and the outcomes
           child’s care plan                      for the child



                                             It provides the child
                                            and their parents with
                                            ongoing assessment
                                                 and services




                                          It closes the child’s case,
                                                when appropriate




                                                     78
Section 3: Child protection
212. Alongside the offer of help and support, there must be strong and effective multi-
agency child protection arrangements 118. Children who need protecting may include those
who experience harm in their own family and those who are harmed or exploited by
others, including their peers, in their community and/or online. Suffering or being likely to
suffer significant harm is the threshold for child protection enquiries and can take different
forms, including sexual, physical or emotional abuse, neglect or domestic abuse
(including controlling or coercive behaviour 119), exploitation by criminal gangs or
organised crime groups, trafficking, online abuse, sexual exploitation, and the influences
of extremism which could lead to radicalisation.

213. Child protection is the set of multi-agency activities and processes that follow a
concern that a child is suffering or likely to suffer significant harm. Under section 47 of the
Children Act 1989, the local authority has a duty to make enquiries when this is the case
and to take decisive action when needed to protect a child from abuse, neglect, and
exploitation. Practitioners responsible for child protection decision-making should be
skilled, experienced and have the right expertise to collate, analyse and distil complex
information in a changing context. Where child protection enquiries are necessary, the
lead practitioner should always be a social worker.

214.        Whatever the form of abuse, neglect and exploitation, practitioners should:

       •   put the needs of children first when determining what action to take
       •   speak to the child at the earliest opportunity to understand what is happening in
           their daily life, recognising that the child may express this through their actions and
           behaviours
       •   work with the family to build trusting and co-operative relationships with parents
           and carers, in line with the principles for working with parents and carers set out in
           chapter 1 of this guidance
       •   use their skills and experience to recognise circumstances where the parent is
           reluctant to engage and seek to understand the factors that might underly this,
           including types of domestic abuse that are resulting in coercive or controlling
           behaviour which limits the parent’s capacity to engage




118
      Children Act 2004
119
   Serious Crime Act 2015 Section 76 provides information regarding circumstances when a child cannot be considered a victim of
coercive or controlling behaviour.




                                                              79
   •   speak to and gather detailed information about the child and, where appropriate,
       their siblings, through engaging with the family network and those who know the
       child well, such as those working in the child’s school or nursery
   •   consider a wide range of evidence from many sources, including other practitioners
       and agencies working with the family
   •   create as full a picture as possible of what is happening for the child, understanding
       what the child’s daily life is like will be critical to making effective decisions about
       their safety
   •   build on existing assessments, including those under section 17 of the Children Act
       1989 or assessments for early or targeted help, where the child is already known to
       services

215. Where the decision is taken not to proceed with a child protection plan or to
discharge the plan, the lead practitioner should consider the support that the child
requires, which might include multi-agency support and/or continued support under
section 17 of the Children Act 1989.

National multi-agency practice standards for child protection
216. Expectations for practice for senior leaders, practice supervisors and practitioners
in local authorities are set out in the Children’s Social Care National Framework. This
includes practice to help keep children safe inside and outside of their homes (Outcome
3).

217. The following national multi-agency practice standards for child protection are for
all practitioners working in services and settings who come into contact with children who
may be suffering or have suffered significant harm within or outside the home. The term
practitioner is used throughout the guidance to refer to individuals who work with children
and their families in any capacity, including a range of professionals, such as qualified
social workers and those who work for the statutory safeguarding partners or in education
settings. Section B is specifically targeted at those directly involved in child protection
work. These standards should be used within the wider context of paragraphs 212-215.

218. Local safeguarding partners need to ensure all practitioners are supported to be
able to achieve these child protection standards, including through:
   •   an unrelenting focus on protection and the best outcomes for children
   •   creating learning cultures in which practitioners stay up to date as new evidence of
       best practice emerges
   •   creating an environment in which it is safe to challenge, including assumptions that
       relate to ethnicity, sex, disability, and sexuality




                                             80
•   supporting practitioners with effective supervision as determined by their regulatory
    body in which they can critically reflect on their findings and strengthen their
    analysis
•   helping practitioners to understand the impact of their decisions on the child and
    family




                                         81
A: Recognising actual or likely significant harm for all practitioners
   •   Practitioners are alert to potential indicators of abuse, neglect, and exploitation,
       and listen carefully to what a child says, how they behave, and observes how
       they communicate if non-verbal (due to age, special needs and/or disabilities,
       or if unwilling to communicate). Practitioners will try to understand the child’s
       personal experiences and observe and record any concerns.
   •   Practitioners communicate in a way that is appropriate to the child’s age and
       level of understanding and use evidence-based practice tools for engaging with
       children, including those with special educational needs and disabilities.
   •   When practitioners have concerns or information about a child that may
       indicate a child is suffering or likely to suffer significant harm, they share them
       with relevant practitioners and escalate them if necessary, using the referral or
       escalation procedure in place within their local multi-agency safeguarding
       arrangements. They update colleagues when they receive relevant new
       information.
   •   Practitioners never assume that information has already been shared by
       another professional or family member and always remain open to changing
       their views about the likelihood of significant harm.
B: Section 47 enquiries, child protection conferences and child protection plans
   •   Practitioners are aware of the limits and strengths of their personal expertise
       and agency remit. They work collaboratively and proactively with multi-agency
       practitioners to build an accurate and comprehensive understanding of the daily
       life of a child and their family to establish the likelihood of significant harm and
       any ongoing risks. Practitioners respect the opinions, knowledge and skills of
       multi-agency colleagues and engage constructively in their challenge.
   •   Practitioners have an applied understanding of what constitutes a child
       suffering actual or likely significant harm. They consider the severity, duration
       and frequency of any abuse, degree of threat, coercion, or cruelty, the
       significance of others in the child’s world, including all adults and children in
       contact with the child (this can include those within the immediate and wider
       family and those in contexts beyond the family, including online), and the
       cumulative impact of adverse events.




                                            82
•   Practitioners take care to ensure that children know what is being discussed
    about them and their family where this is appropriate. They ask children what
    they would like to happen and what they think would help them and their family
    to reduce the likelihood of significant harm, including where harm is taking
    place in contexts beyond the family home. Practitioners listen to what children
    tell them.
•   Practitioners engage parents and the family network, as appropriate, in the
    discussions, recognising previous involvement with agencies and services may
    influence how they engage. Practitioners encourage parents and families to
    express what support would help them to reduce significant harm.
•   Practitioners thoroughly explore the significance of the adults in contact with the
    child and their family or individual histories. They should pay particular attention
    to any serious criminal convictions, previous allegations of child abuse,
    domestic abuse or impulsive violent behaviour, restrictions on contact with
    children or involvement with children subject to child protection plans or care
    proceedings.
•   Practitioners satisfy themselves that conclusions about the likelihood of
    significant harm give sufficient weight to the views, experiences, and concerns
    of those who know the child and/or parents well, including relatives who are
    protective of the child, and other relevant practitioners.
•   Practitioners share their thinking and proposed recommendations with other
    practitioners who hold relevant information and insight into the child and adults
    involved with the child. Practitioners comment, challenge, and jointly deliberate,
    before making a final decision about the likelihood of significant harm.
•   Together with other agencies, practitioners clarify what family help from multi-
    agency partners is necessary to reduce the likelihood of significant harm and
    maintain reasonable care for the children. They seek assurance that this
    resource is available and of sufficient skill and intensity.
•   Practitioners explain clearly to parents and the family network the implications
    of the threshold that has been reached for section 47 enquiries, the initial child
    protection conference, and any ongoing child protection plan (including that this
    threshold may lead to pre-proceedings, should the likelihood of significant harm
    not reduce). Practitioners do everything they can to ensure that parents and the
    family network understand and can engage purposefully with the enquiries and
    any protection plan.




                                         83
    •   Practitioners remain alert to changes in circumstances for the child and family
        and respond as new information comes to light that needs to be reflected in the
        child protection plan.
    •   Practitioners reflect on the proposed protection plan and consider adjustments
        to strengthen the protection plan. The protection plan is specific, achievable,
        and relevant to the likelihood of significant harm and the context in which it is
        occurring.
 C: Discharging the child protection plan

    •   Practitioners work as part of a multi-agency team to create lasting change for
        families and ensure the child, parents and family network know that further help
        and support is available if needed or further concerns arise.
    •   Following a decision to discharge a child protection plan, practitioners ensure
        that appropriate support is in place for the child and family and respond to
        changing circumstances and new information.
    •   Where a child becomes looked after, practitioners ensure that this is well
        planned and that the child, parents and family network are appropriately
        supported. Ongoing need is monitored as part of care planning.




219. The following descriptors and flow charts set out the steps that practitioners should
take when working together to protect a child who is or is likely to suffer significant harm.




                                             84
 Immediate protection
Where there is a risk to the life of a child or a likelihood of serious immediate harm, whether
from inside or outside the home, the local authority, the police (including British Transport
Police) or NSPCC should use their statutory child protection powers to act immediately to
secure the safety of the child, as set out in Section 46 of Children Act 1989.
If it is necessary to remove a child from their home, a local authority must, wherever possible
and unless a child’s safety is otherwise at immediate risk, apply for an Emergency
Protection Order (EPO). Police powers to remove a child in an emergency should be used
only in exceptional circumstances where there is insufficient time to seek an EPO or for
reasons relating to the immediate safety of the child.

An EPO, made by the court, gives authority to remove a child, or prevent a child being
removed from a hospital or other place the child is being accommodated, and places them
under the protection of the applicant.

When considering whether emergency action is necessary, the local authority or the police
should always consider the needs of other children in the same household or in the household
of an alleged perpetrator.

The local authority in whose area a child is found in circumstances that require emergency
action (the first authority) is responsible for taking emergency action. If the child is looked after
by, or the subject of a child protection plan in another authority, the first authority must consult
the authority responsible for the child. Only when the second local authority explicitly accepts
responsibility (to be followed up in writing) is the first authority relieved of its responsibility to
take emergency action.

Multi-agency working
Planned emergency action will normally take place following an immediate strategy
discussion. Social workers, the police or NSPCC should:
   •   initiate a strategy discussion to discuss planned emergency action. Where a single
       agency has to act immediately, a strategy discussion should take place as soon as
       possible after action has been taken
   •   see the child (this should be done by a practitioner from the agency taking the
       emergency action) to decide how best to protect them and whether to seek an EPO
   •   wherever possible, obtain legal advice before initiating legal action, in particular when
       an EPO is being sought
Related information: For further guidance on EPOs see Chapter 4 of the statutory guidance
document for local authorities, Court orders and pre-proceedings (DfE, April 2014).




                                                 85
Strategy discussion
Whenever there is reasonable cause to suspect that a child is suffering or is likely to
suffer significant harm, there should be a strategy discussion involving local authority
children’s social care (including the residential or fostering service, if the child is
looked after), the police, health, and other bodies such as the referring agency,
education, early help, or other practitioners involved in supporting the child. This might
take the form of a multi-agency meeting and more than one discussion may be
necessary. A strategy discussion can take place following a referral or at any other
time, including during the assessment process and when new information is received
on an already open case.
 Purpose
The purpose of a strategy discussion is to determine the child’s welfare and plan rapid
future action if there is reasonable cause to suspect the child is suffering or is likely to
suffer significant harm.
 Attendees
 A local authority social worker, health practitioners and a police representative should,
 as a minimum, be involved in the strategy discussion. Other relevant practitioners will
 depend on the nature of the individual case but may include those who have concerns
 about the child and/or those involved in the child’s life, for example:
    •   the practitioner or agency which made the referral
    •   the child’s school or nursery
    •   any health or care services the child or family members are receiving
    •   youth justice practitioner and/or youth worker
    •   adult mental health, substance misuse and/or domestic abuse specialist
    •   British Transport Police representative
 All attendees should be sufficiently senior to make decisions on behalf of their
 organisation and agencies. They should be sufficiently skilled and experienced to
 prepare for and engage with the strategy discussion and be able to critically assess
 and challenge their own and others’ input.




                                            86
Tasks
The discussion should be used to:
   •    share, seek and analyse available information
   •    agree the conduct and timing of any criminal investigation
   •    consider whether enquiries under section 47 of the Children Act 1989 should be
        undertaken.
It is for the local authority to decide whether to make enquiries and the strategy
discussion should inform this decision.
Where there are grounds to initiate an enquiry under section 47 of the Children Act
1989, decisions should be made as to:
   •    what further information is needed if an assessment is already underway and
        how it will be obtained and recorded
   •    what immediate and short-term action is required to support the child, and who
        will do what by when
   •    whether legal action is required
The timescale for the assessment to reach a decision on next steps should be based
upon the needs of the individual child, consistent with the local protocol and no longer
than 45 working days from the point of referral into local authority children’s social
care.
The assessment framework set out earlier on in this chapter should be followed for
assessments undertaken under section 47 of the Children Act 1989. The lead
practitioner for section 47 enquiries should be a social worker.
Lead practitioners should convene the strategy discussion and make sure they:

   •    consider the child’s welfare and safety, including through speaking to the child,
        and identifying whether the child is suffering or likely to suffer significant harm
   •    decide what information should be shared with the child and family (on the
        basis that information is not shared if this may jeopardise a police investigation
        or place the child at risk of harm)
   •    agree what further action is required, and who will do what by when, where an
        EPO is in place, or the child is the subject of police powers of protection
   •    record agreed decisions in accordance with local recording procedures
   •    follow up actions to make sure what was agreed gets done




                                             87
Health practitioners should:

   •   advise about the appropriateness or otherwise of medical assessments, and
       explain the benefits that arise from assessing previously unmanaged health
       matters that may be further evidence of neglect or maltreatment
   •   provide and co-ordinate any specific information from relevant practitioners
       regarding family health, maternity health, school health mental health, domestic
       abuse and violence, and substance misuse to assist strategy and decision
       making
   •   secure additional expert advice and support from named and/or designated
       professionals for more complex cases following preliminary strategy
       discussions
   •   undertake appropriate examinations or observations, and further investigations
       or tests, to determine how the child’s health or development may be impaired
The Police should:

   •   discuss the basis for any criminal investigation, including both reactive (where
       there is evidence to suggest a crime has been committed) and proactive (where
       further activity is required to establish if a crime has occurred), and any relevant
       processes that other organisations and agencies might need to know about,
       including the timing and methods of evidence-gathering
   •   lead the criminal investigation where joint enquiries take place with the local
       authority children’s social care leading for the section 47 enquires and
       assessment of the child’s welfare




                                            88
Initiating section 47 enquiries
A section 47 enquiry is carried out by undertaking or continuing with an assessment in
accordance with the guidance set out in this chapter.

Local authority social workers should lead assessments under section 47 of the
Children Act 1989. The police, health practitioners, teachers and school staff and other
relevant practitioners should help the local authority in undertaking its enquiries.

Purpose
A section 47 enquiry is initiated to decide whether, and what type of action is required to
safeguard and promote the welfare of a child who is suspected to be suffering, or is
likely to suffer significant harm.
Lead practitioners should:

   •   lead the assessment in accordance with this guidance
   •   carry out enquiries in a way that minimises distress for the child and family
   •   see the child who is the subject of concern to ascertain their wishes and feelings,
       assess their understanding of their situation, assess their relationships and
       circumstances more broadly, and understand the child’s experiences and
       interactions with others, especially where there are concerns of extra-familial
       harm
   •   explain to parents or carers the purpose, process and potential outcome of the
       enquiries and be prepared to answer questions openly, unless to do so would
       affect the safety and welfare of the child
   •   interview parents or carers and determine the wider social and environmental
       factors that might impact on them and their child, including extra-familial contexts
   •   systematically gather information about the child’s and family’s history
   •   analyse the findings of the assessment and evidence about what interventions
       are likely to be most effective with other relevant practitioners
   •   determine the child’s needs and the level of risk of harm faced by the child to
       inform what help should be provided and act to provide that help
   •   follow the guidance set out in “Achieving best evidence in criminal proceedings:
       guidance on interviewing victims and witnesses, and guidance on using special




                                            89
           measures”, where a decision has been made to undertake a joint interview of the
           child as part of any criminal investigation 120
 Health practitioners should:
       •    provide appropriate specialist assessments, for example, paediatric or forensic
            medical assessments, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, speech and
            language therapists and/or child psychologists may be involved in specific
            assessments relating to the child’s developmental progress. The lead health
            practitioner (probably a consultant paediatrician, or possibly the child’s GP) may
            need to request and co-ordinate these assessments
       •    ensure appropriate treatment and follow up health concerns, such as
            administering missing vaccines
 The Police should:

      •    help other organisations and agencies understand the reasons for concerns
           about the child’s safety and welfare by sharing information and analysis
      •    decide whether or not police investigations reveal grounds for instigating criminal
           proceedings
      •    make available to other practitioners any other relevant information gathered or
           known to inform discussions about the child’s welfare
      •    follow the guidance set out in “Achieving best evidence in criminal proceedings:
           guidance” on interviewing victims and witnesses, and guidance on using special
           measures, where a decision has been made to undertake a joint interview of the
           child as part of the criminal investigation
 All involved practitioners should:
      •    contribute to the assessment as required, providing information and analysis
           about the child and family
      •    consider whether a joint enquiry or investigation team may need to speak to a
           child victim without the knowledge of the parent or carers
      •    approach the work with parents and carers in line with the principles in chapter 1
      •    seek advice and guidance as required and in line with local practice




120
  Achieving best evidence in criminal proceedings: guidance on interviewing victims and witnesses, and guidance on using special
measures (2011).




                                                               90
Outcome of section 47 enquiries
The lead practitioner (social worker) is responsible for deciding what action to take
and how to proceed following section 47 enquiries. They should make these decisions
based on multi-agency discussions informed by the voice of the child.

If local authority children’s social care decides not to proceed with a child protection
conference, then other practitioners involved with the child and family have the right to
request that local authority children’s social care convene a conference if they have
serious concerns that a child’s welfare may not be adequately safeguarded. As a last
resort, the safeguarding partners should have in place a quick and straightforward
means of resolving differences of opinion.

Where concerns of significant harm are not substantiated
Lead practitioners should:
    •   discuss the case with the child, parents and other practitioners and be
        prepared to answer questions openly and be clear on next steps
    •   discuss whether support from any services may be helpful and help secure it
    •   consider whether the child’s health and development should be re-assessed
        regularly against specific objectives and decide who has responsibility for
        doing this
    •   discuss with the family whether they wish to be referred to a family group
        decision-making forum, such as a family group conference, to determine
        ongoing support for the child and family
 All involved practitioners should:
    •   participate in further discussions as necessary
    •   contribute to the development of any plan as appropriate
    •   provide services as specified in the plan for the child
    •   review the impact of services delivered as agreed in the plan
    •   approach the work with parents and carers in line with the principles set out in
        chapter 1 of this guidance
    •   seek advice and guidance as required and in line with local practice guidance
    •   consider the plans for ongoing assessment and reviewing the child’s
        circumstances




                                           91
Where concerns of significant harm are substantiated, and the child is judged to
be suffering or likely to suffer significant harm:
Lead practitioners should:
   •   convene an initial child protection conference (see next section for details).
       The timing of this conference should depend on the urgency of the case and
       respond to the needs of the child and the nature and severity of the harm they
       may be facing. The initial child protection conference should take place within
       15 working days of a strategy discussion, or the strategy discussion at which
       section 47 enquiries were initiated if more than one has been held
   •   consider which practitioners with specialist knowledge or relevant professional
       disciplines should be invited to participate so that the plan will meet the child’s
       needs
   •   seek to communicate the outcome and rationale to the referring practitioner or
       agency, and give particular consideration to whether they should be included
       in the child protection conference
   •   ensure that the child and their parents understand the purpose and who will
       attend, parents should be given appropriate information to support their
       participation in the conference
   •   help prepare the child if they are attending or making representations through
       a third party to the conference
   •   give information about advocacy agencies and explain that the family may
       bring an advocate, friend, or supporter
All involved practitioners should:
   •   be sufficiently skilled and experienced to prepare for and engage with the child
       protection conference, and able to critically assess and challenge their own
       and others’ input
   •   contribute to the information their agency provides ahead of the conference,
       setting out the nature of the organisations or agency’s involvement with the
       child and family
   •   offer clear analysis based on their perspective
   •   consider, in conjunction with the police and the appointed conference chair,
       whether the report can and should be shared with the parents and if so when
   •   approach the work with parents and carers in line with the principles set out in
       chapter 1 of this guidance
   •   attend the conference when invited and participate in decision-making
   •   seek advice and guidance as required and in line with local practice guidance



                                           92
Initial child protection conferences
 Following section 47 enquiries, an initial child protection conference brings together
 family members (and the child where appropriate), with the supporters, advocates,
 and practitioners most involved with the child and family, to make decisions about the
 child’s future safety, health and development. If concerns relate to an unborn child,
 consideration should be given as to whether to hold a child protection conference prior
 to the child’s birth.

 Purpose
 To bring together and analyse, in a multi-agency and multi-disciplinary meeting, all
 relevant information and plan how best to safeguard and promote the welfare of the
 child and protect them from harm. It is the responsibility of the conference to make
 recommendations on how organisations and agencies work together to safeguard the
 child in future.

 Practitioners and parents should be provided with clear and accurate information
 about the conference process to support effective planning. All practitioners should
 approach the work with parents and carers in line with the principles set out in chapter
 1 of this guidance.

 Conference tasks include:
    •    appointing a lead statutory body (either local authority children’s social care or
         NSPCC) and a lead social worker, who should be experienced and an
         employee of the lead statutory body
    •    identifying membership of the core group of practitioners and family members
         who will develop and implement the child protection plan
    •    establishing timescales for meetings of the core group, production of a child
         protection plan and for child protection review meetings
     •   agreeing an outline child protection plan, with clear actions and timescales,
         including a clear sense of how much improvement is needed, by when, so that
         success can be judged clearly




                                              93
The conference chair:
   •   is accountable to the Director of Children’s Services, where possible the same
       person should chair subsequent child protection reviews
   •   should be a practitioner, independent of operational and/or line management
       responsibilities for the case
   •   should meet the child and parents in advance to ensure they understand the
       issues, the purpose, the process, and possible outcomes of the conference
   •   should be prepared to answer questions openly
   •   should approach the work with parents and carers in line with the principles set
       out in chapter 1 of this guidance
   •   should consider whether members of the family network should attend and
       participate in the conference
   •   should ensure all participants are encouraged to contribute views independently
Lead practitioners should:
   •   convene, attend, and present information about the reason for the conference,
       their understanding of the child’s needs, parental capacity, family and
       environmental context (including extra-familial contexts), and evidence of how
       the child has been abused, neglected, or exploited and its impact on their
       health and development
   •   analyse the information to enable informed decisions about what action is
       necessary to safeguard and promote the welfare of the child who is the subject
       of the conference
   •   share the conference information with the child and family beforehand (where
       appropriate)
   •   prepare a report for the conference on the child and family which sets out and
       analyses what is known about the child and family and the local authority’s
       recommendation
   •   record conference decisions and recommendations and ensure action follows




                                          94
All involved practitioners should:
   •   work together to safeguard the child from harm in the future, taking timely,
       effective action according to the plan agreed
   •   attend and present information about their understanding or the child’s needs,
       parental capacity, family, and environmental factors (including extra-familial
       contexts) and evidence of how the child has been abused, neglected, or
       exploited and its impact on their health and development
   •   bring their agency perspective, expertise and challenge and contribute to
       decisions about actual or likely significant harm and actions to address by
       contributing to the plan to safeguard and promote the welfare of the child who is
       the subject of the conference
Safeguarding partners should:

   •    monitor the effectiveness of child protection conference arrangements




                                         95
The child protection plan

 Actions and responsibilities following the initial child protection conference
 Purpose:
 The aim of the child protection plan is to:
    •   ensure the child is safe from harm (including inside and outside of the home, and
        online) and prevent them from suffering further harm
    •   promote the child’s health and development
    •   support the parents, family, and the family network to safeguard and promote the
        welfare of the child
    •   set out the support and resources to be provided by each agency to safeguard
        and promote the welfare of the child
 Local authority children’s social care should:
    •   designate a social worker to be the lead practitioner as they carry statutory
        responsibility for the child’s welfare
    •   consider the evidence and decide what legal action to take if any, where a child
        has suffered or is likely to suffer significant harm
    •   define the local protocol for timeliness of circulating plans after the child
        protection conference
 Lead practitioners should:
    •   be the lead for multi-agency and multi-disciplinary work with the child and family,
        co-ordinating the contribution of family members, including through family group
        decision-making such as family group conferences, and practitioners into putting
        the child protection plan into effect
    •   support multi-agency and multi-disciplinary practitioners to contribute to the
        development of the outline child protection plan into a more detailed multi-agency
        plan and circulate to all relevant practitioners (and family where appropriate)
    •   ensure the child protection plan is aligned and integrated with any associated
        offender risk management plan
    •   undertake direct work with the child and family in accordance with the child
        protection plan, taking into account the child’s wishes and feelings, and the views
        of the parents in so far as they are consistent with the child’s welfare




                                               96
  •   approach work with parents and carers in line with the principles set out in
      chapter 1
  •   complete the child’s and family’s in-depth assessment, securing contributions
      from core group members and other practitioners as necessary
  •   undertake direct work with the family network, for example, through family
      group decision-making such as family group conferences, to consider how the
      family network can support the plan and update the plan accordingly
  •   explain the plan to the child in a manner which is in accordance with their age
      and understanding and agree the plan with the child
  •   if needed, inform the relevant embassy if the child has links to a foreign country
  •   co-ordinate progress reviews against the planned outcomes set out in the plan,
      updating as required. The first review should be held within three months of the
      initial conference and further reviews at intervals of no more than six months for
      as long as the child remains subject of a child protection plan
  •   record decisions and actions agreed at core group meetings as well as the
      written views of those who were not able to attend and follow up those actions
      to ensure they take place. The child protection plan should be updated as
      necessary
  •   lead core group activity
The core group should:
  •   meet within 10 working days from the initial child protection conference if the
      child is the subject of a child protection plan
  •   further develop the outline child protection plan, based on assessment findings,
      and set out what needs to change, by how much, and by when in order for the
      child to be safe and have their needs met
  •   decide what steps need to be taken, and by whom, to complete the in-depth
      assessment to inform decisions about the child’s safety and welfare
  •   share information about relevant multi-agency and multi-disciplinary resources
      and services available, agree what should be provided to the child and parents
      as part of the plan and how this will be funded. Practitioners should agree how
      impact will be assessed
  •   implement the child protection plan and take joint responsibility for carrying out
      the agreed tasks, monitoring progress and outcomes, and refining the plan as
      needed




                                         97
Child protection review conference
The review conference procedures for preparation, decision-making and other
procedures should be the same as those for an initial child protection conference.
Purpose:
To review whether the child is continuing to suffer or is likely to suffer significant harm
and review developmental progress against child protection plan outcomes.
To consider whether the child protection plan should continue or should be changed.
Lead practitioners should:
   •   attend and lead the organisation of the conference
   •   determine when the review conference should be held within three months of the
       initial conference, and thereafter at maximum intervals of six months
   •   provide information to enable informed decisions about what action is necessary
       to continue to safeguard and promote the welfare of the child, and the
       effectiveness and impact of action taken so far
   •   share the conference information with the child and family beforehand, where
       appropriate, and ensure that they understand the information provided
   •   approach work with parents and carers in line with the principles set out in
       chapter 1
   •   engage the family network where this is appropriate to support the child. If there
       is family group decision-making, such as a family group conference, parents and
       family networks should have the opportunity to prepare for it in advance
   •   record conference outcomes
   •   decide whether to initiate family court proceedings (all the children in the
       household should be considered, even if concerns are only expressed about one
       child) if the child is considered to be suffering significant harm




                                            98
All involved practitioners should:
   •   attend, when invited, and provide details of their involvement with the child and
       family
   •   produce reports for the child protection review. This information will provide an
       overview of work undertaken by family members and practitioners and evaluate
       the impact on the child’s welfare against the planned outcomes set out in the
       child protection plan
   •   approach work with parents and carers in line with the principles set out in
       chapter 1
   •   be sufficiently skilled and experienced to prepare for and engage with the
       review, and able to critically assess and challenge their own and other’s input




                                           99
Discontinuing the child protection plan
 A child should no longer be the subject of a child protection plan if:
    •   it is judged that the child is no longer continuing to, or is likely to, suffer
        significant harm and therefore no longer requires safeguarding by means of a
        child protection plan
    •   the child and family have moved permanently to another local authority area. In
        such cases, the receiving local authority should convene a child protection
        conference within 15 working days of being notified of the move. Only after this
        event may the original local authority discontinue its child protection
    •   the child has reached the age of 18 years (to end the child protection plan, the
        local authority should have a review around the child’s birthday, and this should
        be planned in advance), has died, or has permanently left the United Kingdom
 Lead practitioners should:
    •   notify, as a minimum, all agency representatives who were invited to attend the
        initial child protection conference that led to the plan
    •   seek input on the decision to discontinue from other core group members and
        ensure that all practitioners who are involved in supporting the child and
        parents are notified
    •   consider whether support services are still required and discuss with the child,
        parents, family, and family network as appropriate what might be needed,
        based on a re-assessment of the child’s needs, including where this may
        involve transition between child and adult services




                                           100
Initiating pre-proceedings
 Once the child protection process has been carried out, it may be deemed by the local
 authority that there is still not sufficient protection of the child by the parents and that the
 ‘threshold’ 121 for care proceedings has been met in principle. In this instance, the local
 authority should determine whether to initiate pre-proceedings and follow the ‘Court
 orders and pre-proceedings guidance for local authorities’ 122. This decision should be
 informed by engagement with other relevant agencies. During this period, the local
 authority should offer family group decision-making, such as family group conferences,
 to continue to explore potential placements within the family network and to clarify the
 realistic options available for the child. At pre-proceedings, records of key discussions
 with the family can be used as evidence of decision-making 123.
 The pre-proceedings process acts as the final opportunity for parents to avoid care
 proceedings. Whilst pre-proceedings may be initiated at this final stage as per flow chart
 6, where the local authority considers the “threshold” for care proceedings to be met,
 proceedings can be initiated at any stage.
 The local authority should work in partnership with families and, where possible, any
 extra support or services needed to support the family should be identified and put in
 place. There should be clear expectations set with parents about the changes they are
 required to make.
 Link to the full statutory guidance on court orders and pre-proceedings can be found in
 Appendix B of this document, titled “Children Act 1989: court orders and pre-
 proceedings”.
 When initiating pre-proceedings, practitioners should review Practice Direction 12A, the
 link can also be found in Appendix B. The pre-proceedings checklist in this Practice
 Direction outlines the documentation that must be prepared in pre-proceedings or
 before and submitted as part of the local authority application for a court order.
 Practitioners and strategic leads can also refer to the family justice hub for access to
 resources and tools to support the delivery of best practice in pre-proceedings. A link to
 these resources can be found in Appendix B, titled “Pre-proceedings and family justice
 hub”.




121
    The Children Act 1989 Section 31 (2)
122
    Court Orders and Pre-proceedings for Local Authorities (2014)
123
    Practice direction 12A – Care supervision and other part 4 proceedings: guide to case management.




                                                              101
Flow chart 3: Immediate protection

                      An agency with statutory child protection powers
                       (meaning local authority children's social care,
                              health or police) considers that a
                          child may need immediate protection



                                  The local authority convenes an
                                 immediate strategy discussion
                               with children’s social care, health and
                              the police, and the NSPCC, if involved



                          The relevant agency seeks legal advice
                                 and records the outcome



                     The local authority decides, with involvement from
                              other agencies, whether to take
                             immediate safeguarding action
                     and what the sequence of information sharing
                         should be, especially to the child’s family


                          The relevant agency meets with the child
                                   and records the outcome



                                        The relevant agency               The relevant agency
                                             decides that                 decides that the child
    The relevant agency                no immediate action                   does require
    decides that the child                   is required                 immediate protection
       does not require                     but the child is
   immediate protection               a child in need (CiN).
  and is also not meeting               The family agrees a
     the threshold for a              plan with practitioners
    child in need (CiN).              and agencies to ensure                   Local authority
        It works with the                  the child’s future             children's social care
      family to help them                safety and welfare.                 holds a strategy
    access the right help,                The local authority                 discussion and
       which could be a                   records the plan                  makes an enquiry
    combination of early                 for all concerned to                under section 47
  help, targeted early help                   act on the                 of the Children Act 1989
  and universal services                  decisions made                   (refer to flow chart 5
                                        (refer to flow chart 4           on strategy discussion)
                                           on assessment)




                                                 102
Flow chart 4: Action taken for an assessment of a child under
the Children Act 1989
                    A social work qualified practice supervisor or manager (whoever is
                         the lead practitioner, as agreed with partners) makes an
                     initial assessment, in line with local protocols and within one
                   working day of a referral, and decides on the next course of action



                         The lead practitioner makes a full assessment based on
                              the needs of the child within 45 working days
                     and informs the referring agency about the next course of action


                                                                     The lead practitioner assesses
                                                                        that the child has suffered
                                                                           actual (or is likely to
                                                                         suffer) significant harm
                                                                         and follows the process to
                                                                         put in place section 17 or
                                                                            section 47 support
                                                                      (refer to flow chart 5 on action
                                                                     following a strategy discussion)
         The lead practitioner assesses that the
       child has not suffered and is not likely
            to suffer significant harm and
       no local authority children's social care
         intervention is needed. The family is                The lead practitioner decides that
        supported to access universal help, early                  children’s social care
        help or early targeted help, as applicable                  support is required



             The lead practitioner assesses
                                                              The lead practitioner discusses the
               that children’s social care
                                                                   next steps with the child,
                 support is not required
                                                               the family and other practitioners
              but other action is needed



                The lead practitioner refers                    The lead practitioner continues
               the child and their family for                       their assessment and
          early help assessment or help from                    co-ordinates the provision of
            universal and targeted services                       services, where needed



                                                               The lead practitioner agrees with
                                                              the family and other practitioners,
                                                             within 45 working days, whether to
                                                           put in place a child in need (CiN) plan
                                                            or a child protection plan (CPP), and
                                                           other relevant services, where needed




                                                            The lead practitioner reviews the plan
                                                                and child outcomes, and when
                                                               appropriate, refers the child either
                                                                to non-statutory services or for
                                                           section 47 enquiries, or closes the case




                                                     103
Flow chart 5: Action following a strategy meeting

     A lead practitioner convenes a strategy discussion                The police investigate whether a crime
       to decide whether to initiate section 47 enquiries                       has been committed
               and records the decisions taken




          The outcome is that                                                    The outcome is to initiate
             local authority              The outcome is to carry out an        enquiries under section 47
       children’s social care has         assessment under section 17            of the Children Act 1989
       no further involvement                of the Children Act 1989
          but other services                   (refer to flow chart 4)
           may be required


                   The lead practitioner makes an assessment within 45 working days of the referral,
                              in line with local protocol and based on the needs of the child,
                                              and other practitioners contribute




           The lead practitioner                   The lead practitioner                 The lead practitioner
            assesses that the                       assesses that the                     assesses that the
            concerns are not                  concerns are substantiated             concerns are substantiated
             substantiated                    but the child is not suffering           and the child is suffering
            but the child is a                  or is not likely to suffer               or is likely to suffer
           child in need (CiN)                      significant harm                      significant harm



             They agree a plan
         with the family and other              They decide whether it is
        practitioners to ensure the              necessary to convene a
     child’s future safety and welfare,       child protection conference,
          recording and acting on             recording the decisions made
            the decisions made




                                                                         They convene a
      The lead practitioner decides                               child protection conference
             not to convene                                          within 15 working days
     a child protection conference                                 of the strategy discussion,
                                                                  recording the decisions made




           They agree a plan
        with the family and other              The conference participants            The conference participants
       practitioners to ensure the                decide that the child                  decide that the child
          child’s future safety                    is not suffering or                      is suffering or
       and welfare, recording and                    likely to suffer                     is likely to suffer
      acting on the decisions made                  significant harm                       significant harm
          (refer to flow chart 4)




                                            They agree a plan with the family            The lead practitioner
                                                and other practitioners to            prepares an outline child
                                            ensure the child’s future safety           protection plan (CPP)
                                            and welfare, recording and acting             and a core group
                                                 on the decisions made                     is established
                                                  (refer to flow chart 4)               (refer to flow chart 6)




                                                            104
Flow chart 6: What happens after the child protection
conference, including review?
                                Local authority children’s social care
                  makes a child the subject of a child protection plan (CPP).
                 The lead practitioner meets with the core group of practitioners
                           who prepared the outline CPP within 10 days
                            of the initial child protection conference



                   The lead practitioner completes a multi-agency assessment
                           in line with local protocols, and the core group
                   commissions further specialist assessments as necessary



                 The lead practitioner and the core group develop and implement
               the child protection plan (CPP). They provide or commission the
             necessary interventions for the child and their family in line with the CPP




             The lead practitioner convenes a child protection review conference with
            the core group within 3 months of the initial child protection conference.




              The lead practitioner and the                 The lead practitioner and the
            core group assess that there are              core group assess that there are
            no ongoing or further concerns                 ongoing or further concerns
                about significant harm                        about significant harm




             The lead practitioner records that          The lead practitioner records that
            the child is no longer the subject             the child remains the subject
               of a child protection plan,              of a revised child protection plan
             and the reasons for this decision           and implements an updated plan




             The core group decides whether              The lead practitioner convenes a
              the child and their family need            second child protection review
           service provision to be continued               conference within 6 months
                and plans access with the                  of the first to make decisions
           family to early help, targeted early           based on the needs of the child
               help or universal services,
                   or whether the child is
            a child in need (CiN) and requires
                   a child in need plan                  If concerns remain and outcomes
                                                            are not improving for the child,
                                                             the lead practitioner convenes
                                                                a conference to consider
                                                             further protection, which may
                                                        include moving to care proceedings.
                                                                   If a decision is taken to
                                                               move to care proceedings,
                                                           local authority children’s services
                                                         sends a letter before proceedings
                                                           to the parents and/or anyone with
                                                          parental responsibility for the child,
                                                              initiating pre-proceedings and
                                                           setting out the Public Law Outline




                                                  105
Chapter 4: Organisational responsibilities
220. A range of individual organisations and agencies working with children and families
have specific statutory duties to promote the welfare of children and ensure they are
protected from harm. These duties, as applied to individual organisations and agencies,
are set out in this chapter.

 Section 11 of the Children Act 2004
 Places duties on a range of organisations, agencies, and individuals to ensure their
 functions, and any services that they contract out to others, are discharged having
 regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children.


221.   Section 11 places a duty on:
   •   local authorities and district councils that provide children’s and other types of
       services, including children’s and adult social care, public health, housing, sport,
       culture and leisure services, licensing authorities and youth services
   •   NHS organisations and agencies and the independent sector, including NHS
       England, ICBs, NHS Trusts, NHS Foundation Trusts and general practitioners
   •   the police, including Police and Crime Commissioners and the chief officer of each
       police force in England and the Mayor’s Office for Policing and Crime where they
       exist
   •   the British Transport Police
   •   the Probation Service
   •   governors or directors of prisons and young offender institutions (YOIs)
   •   directors of secure training centres (STCs)
   •   youth offending teams (YOTs)

222. These organisations and agencies should have in place arrangements that reflect
the importance of safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children, including:
   •   a clear line of accountability for the commissioning and/or provision of services
       designed to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
   •   a senior board level lead with the required knowledge, skills, and expertise or
       sufficiently qualified and experienced to take leadership responsibility for the
       organisation’s or agency’s safeguarding arrangements
   •   a culture of listening to children and taking account of their wishes and feelings,
       both in individual decisions and the development of services




                                            106
       •    clear whistleblowing procedures, which reflect the principles in Sir Robert Francis’
            ‘Freedom to Speak Up Review’ and are suitably referenced in staff training and
            codes of conduct, and a culture that enables issues about safeguarding and
            promoting the welfare of children to be addressed 124
       •    clear escalation policies for staff to follow when their child safeguarding concerns
            are not being addressed within their organisation or by other agencies
       •    arrangements which set out clearly the processes for sharing information, with
            other practitioners and with safeguarding partners
       •    a designated practitioner (or, for health provider organisations/agencies, named
            practitioners). Please see Health Practitioners with Specific Duties for more detail)
            for child safeguarding. Their role is to support other practitioners in their
            organisations and agencies to recognise the needs of children, including protection
            from possible abuse or neglect. Designated practitioner roles should always be
            explicitly defined in job descriptions. Practitioners should be given sufficient time,
            funding, supervision, and support to fulfil their child welfare and safeguarding
            responsibilities effectively
       •    safe recruitment practices and ongoing safe working practices for individuals whom
            the organisation or agency permit to work regularly with children, including policies
            on when to obtain a criminal record check
       •    appropriate supervision and support for staff, including undertaking safeguarding
            training
       •    creating a culture of safety, equality, and protection within the services they provide

In addition:
       •    employers are responsible for ensuring that their staff are competent to carry out
            their responsibilities for safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children and
            creating an environment where staff feel able to raise concerns and feel supported
            in their safeguarding role
       •    staff should be given a mandatory induction, which includes familiarisation with
            child protection responsibilities and the procedures to be followed if anyone has
            any concerns about a child’s safety or welfare
       •    all practitioners should have regular reviews of their own practice to ensure they
            have knowledge, skills and expertise that improve over time




124
      Sir Robert Francis’ freedom to speak up review




                                                       107
People in positions of trust
223. Organisations and agencies working with children and families should have clear
policies for dealing with allegations against people who work with children. Such policies
should make a clear distinction between an allegation, a concern about the quality of care
or practice, or a complaint. An allegation may relate to a person who works with children
who has:

   •   behaved in a way that has harmed a child, or may have harmed a child
   •   possibly committed a criminal offence against or related to a child
   •   behaved towards a child or children in a way that indicates they may pose a risk of
       harm to children
   •   behaved or may have behaved in a way that indicates they may not be suitable to
       work with children

224. County level and unitary local authorities should ensure that allegations against
people who work with children are not dealt with in isolation. Any action necessary to
address corresponding welfare concerns in relation to the child or children involved should
be taken without delay and in a co-ordinated manner. Local authorities should, in addition,
have designated a particular officer, or team of officers known as local authority
designated officers (LADO), (either as part of local multi-agency arrangements or
otherwise), to be involved in the management and oversight of allegations against people
who work with children. Any such officer, or team of officers, should be sufficiently
qualified and experienced to be able to fulfil this role effectively, for example, qualified
social workers. Any new appointments to such a role, other than current or former
designated officers moving between local authorities, should be qualified social workers.
Arrangements should be put in place to ensure that any allegations about those who work
with children are passed to the designated officer, or team of officers, without delay.

225. Local authorities should put in place arrangements to provide advice and guidance
to employers, and voluntary organisations and agencies on how to deal with allegations
against people who work with children. Local authorities should also ensure that there are
appropriate arrangements in place to liaise effectively with the police and other
organisations and agencies to monitor the progress of cases and ensure that they are
dealt with as quickly as possible, consistent with a thorough and fair process.

226. Employers, school governors, trustees and voluntary organisations should ensure
that they have clear policies in place setting out the process, including timescales for
investigation and what support and advice will be available to individuals against whom
allegations have been made. Any allegation against people who work with children should
be reported immediately to a senior manager within the organisation or agency. The




                                            108
designated officer, or team of officers, should also be informed within one working day of
all allegations that come to an employer’s attention or that are made directly to the police.
If the person is subject to registration or regulation by a professional body or regulator, for
example by the Care Quality Commission or Ofsted, the designated officer should advise
on whether a referral to that body is appropriate.

227. If an organisation or agency removes an individual (paid worker or unpaid
volunteer) from work in regulated activity 125 with children (or would have, had the person
not left first) because the person poses a risk of harm to children, the organisation or
agency should make a referral to the Disclosure and Barring Service to consider whether
to add the individual to the barred list. In some circumstances, organisations and agencies
will be under a legal duty to make a referral to the Disclosure and Barring Service 126.

228. This applies irrespective of whether a referral has been made to local authority
children’s social care and/or the designated officer, or team of officers. It is an offence to
fail to make a referral without good reason 127.


Individual organisational responsibilities
229. In addition to these section 11 duties, which apply to a number of named
organisations and agencies, further safeguarding duties are also placed on individual
organisations and agencies through other statutes. The key duties that fall on each
individual organisation are set out below.

Schools, colleges and other educational providers
230. The following have duties in relation to safeguarding and promoting the welfare of
children:

      •   governing bodies of maintained schools (including maintained nursery schools),
          and colleges which includes providers of post 16 Education as set out in the
          Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Act 2009: 16-19 Academies, Special
          Post-16 institutions and Independent Training Providers 128
      •   proprietors of independent schools, (including academies, free schools, and
          alternative provision academies) and non-maintained special schools. In the case
          of academies, free schools and alternative provision academies, the proprietor will
          be the academy trust



125
    Regulated activity in relation to children: scope
126
    Making barring referrals to the DBS
127
    Further guidance on referrals to the DBS is available at Appendix B
128
    Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Act 2009




                                                                109
      •   management committees of pupil referral units (PRUs) 129
      •   senior leadership teams

231.      This guidance applies in its entirety to all schools

232. Schools, colleges, and other educational settings must also have regard to
statutory guidance ‘Keeping children safe in education’, which provides further guidance
as to how they should fulfil their duties in respect of safeguarding and promoting the
welfare of children in their care 130.

Early years and childcare
233. Early years providers have a duty under section 40 of the Childcare Act 2006 131 to
comply with the welfare requirements of the early years foundation stage (EYFS) 132. Early
years providers must ensure that:

      •   they are alert to any issues of concern in the child’s life
      •   they implement policies and procedures to safeguard children. This must include
          an explanation of the action to be taken when there are safeguarding concerns
          about a child and in the event of an allegation being made against a member of
          staff. The policy must also cover the use of mobile phones and cameras in the
          setting, that staff complete safeguarding training that enables them to understand
          their safeguarding policy and procedures, have up-to-date knowledge of
          safeguarding issues, and recognise signs of potential abuse and neglect
      •   they have a practitioner who is designated to take lead responsibility for
          safeguarding children within each early years setting and who must liaise with local
          statutory children’s services as appropriate. This lead must also complete child
          protection training

Health
234. ICBs are one of the three statutory safeguarding partners as set out in chapter 2.
NHS organisations and agencies are subject to the section 11 duties set out in this
chapter. Health practitioners are in a strong position to identify welfare needs or
safeguarding concerns regarding individual children and, where appropriate, provide
support. This includes understanding risk factors, communicating and sharing information
effectively with children and families, liaising with other organisations and agencies,



129
    Education Act 2002 Section 175 for management committees of pupil referral units, by virtue of regulation 3 and paragraph 19A of
Schedule 1 to the Education (Pupil Referral Units) (Application of Enactments) (England) Regulations 2007
130
    Keeping children safe in education
131
    Childcare Act 2006 Section 40
132
    Section 3 – safeguarding and welfare requirements in the statutory framework for the early years foundation stage




                                                               110
assessing needs and capacity, responding to those needs, and contributing to multi-
agency assessments and reviews.

235. A wide range of health practitioners have a critical role to play in safeguarding and
promoting the welfare of children, including: GPs, primary care practitioners,
paediatricians, nurses, health visitors, midwives, public health school nurses, allied health
practitioners, those working in maternity, children and young people’s mental health,
youth custody establishments, adult mental health, sexual, alcohol and drug services for
both adults and children, unscheduled and emergency care settings, highly specialised
services, and secondary and tertiary care.

236. All staff working in healthcare settings, including those who predominantly treat
adults, should receive training to ensure they attain the competences appropriate to their
role and follow the relevant professional guidance 133,134,135.

237.      Within the NHS 136:

      •   NHS England is responsible for ensuring that the health commissioning system as
          a whole is working effectively to safeguard and promote the welfare of children. It is
          accountable for the services it directly commissions or delegates, including
          healthcare services in the under 18 secure estate (for police custody settings see
          below in the policing section). NHS England also leads and defines improvement in
          safeguarding practice and outcomes and should also ensure that there are
          effective mechanisms for safeguarding partners to raise concerns about the
          engagement and leadership of the local NHS. Each NHSE region should have a
          safeguarding lead to ensure regional collaboration and assurance through
          convening safeguarding forums.
      •   ICBs are one of the statutory safeguarding partners and the major commissioners
          of local health services. They are responsible for the provision of effective clinical,
          professional, and strategic leadership to child safeguarding, including the quality
          assurance of safeguarding through their contractual arrangements with all provider
          organisations and agencies, including from independent providers.




133
    Safeguarding Children and Young People: roles and competencies for health care staff (RCN, 2019)
134
    Looked after children: Roles and competences of health care staff (RCN, 2020)
135
    For example, Protecting children and young people: the responsibilities of all doctors (GMC, 2018) and Safeguarding children and
young people: the RCGP/NSPCC’s safeguarding children toolkit for general practice (RCGP, 2018)
136
    Further guidance on accountabilities for safeguarding children in the NHS is available in Safeguarding children, young people and
adults at risk in the NHS: safeguarding accountability and assurance framework (2022)




                                                                111
Health practitioners with specific duties

238. Detailed descriptions of roles and competencies for health practitioners with
specific duties are set out in the relevant Intercollegiate Documents.

Designated health practitioners

239. ICBs should employ, or have in place, a contractual agreement to secure the
expertise of designated practitioners, such as dedicated designated doctors and nurses
for safeguarding children, and dedicated designated doctors and nurses for looked after
children (and designated doctor or paediatrician for unexpected deaths in childhood).

240. In some areas, where the ICB has more than one local authority in its footprint,
they may consider ‘lead’ or ‘hosting’ arrangements for their designated health
professionals, or a clinical network arrangement with the number of designated doctors
and nurses for child safeguarding equating to the size and complexity of the child
population. Designated doctors and nurses, as senior professionals, clinical experts, and
strategic leaders, are a vital source of safeguarding advice and expertise for all relevant
organisations and agencies but particularly the ICB, NHS England, and the local authority,
and for advice and support to other health practitioners across the health economy. The
NHS commissioners and providers should ensure that designated professionals are given
sufficient time to be fully engaged, involved, and included in the new safeguarding
arrangements.

Named health practitioners

241. All providers of NHS funded health services, including NHS Trusts and NHS
Foundation Trusts, should identify a dedicated named doctor and a named nurse (and a
named midwife if the organisation or agency provides maternity services) for safeguarding
children. In the case of ambulance trusts and independent providers, this should be a
named practitioner. Named practitioners have a key role in promoting good professional
practice within their organisation and agency, providing advice and expertise for fellow
practitioners, and ensuring safeguarding training is in place. They should work closely
with their organisation’s or agency’s safeguarding lead on the executive board,
designated health professionals for the health economy and other statutory safeguarding
partners.




                                           112
242. ICBs should employ named GPs for safeguarding children to advise and support
GP practice safeguarding leads. GP practices should have a lead and deputy lead for
safeguarding, who should work closely with the named GP 137.

Other organisations providing NHS services

243. Other public, voluntary, and independent sector organisations, agencies and social
enterprises providing NHS services to children and families should ensure that they follow
this guidance.

Police
244. The police are one of the three statutory safeguarding partners as set out in
chapter 2 and are subject to the section 11 duties set out in this chapter. Under section
1(8)(h) of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 138, the Police and Crime
Commissioner (PCC) must hold the Chief Constable to account for the exercise of the
latter’s duties in relation to safeguarding children under sections 10 and 11 of the Children
Act 2004.

245. All police officers and other police employees, such as Police Community Support
Officers, are well placed to identify early when a child’s welfare is at risk and when a child
may need protection from harm. Children have the right to the full protection offered by
criminal law. In addition to identifying when a child may be a victim of a crime, police
officers should be aware of the effect of other incidents which might pose safeguarding
risks to children and where officers should pay particular attention. Harm may be indirect
and non-physical as, for example, in the case of some domestic abuse which may involve
controlling or coercive behaviour, or economic abuse. An officer attending a domestic
abuse incident should be aware of the effect of such behaviour on any children in the
household and recognise that children who see, hear, or experience the effects of
domestic abuse are victims in their own right 139.

246. Children who are encountered as offenders, or alleged offenders, are entitled to the
same safeguards and protection as any other child and due regard should be given to
their safety and welfare at all times. These children are often victims of harm, for example,
children who are apprehended in possession of Class A drugs may be victims of
exploitation through county lines drug dealing. Consideration should be given to the
potential impact an arrest or seizure of items may have upon a child’s immediate and
ongoing safety and whether there is actual or likely significant harm. This might include




137
    Child safeguarding toolkit: Introduction | Home (rcgp.org.uk)
138
    Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 Section 1 (8) (h)
139
    Domestic Abuse Act 2021, section 3




                                                                113
self-harm, threats, or violence from criminal gangs to the child and their family following
loss of money and/or drugs and a “debt” can be created which is also known as debt
bondage 140.

247. The police will hold important information about children who may be suffering, or
likely to suffer, significant harm, as well as those who cause such harm. They should
always share this information with other organisations and agencies where this is
necessary to protect children. Similarly, they can expect other organisations and agencies
to share information to enable the police to carry out their duties. All police forces should
have officers trained in child abuse investigation and safeguarding responsibilities.
Officers making decisions about whether children are referred into children’s social care
should be confident in understanding and applying the local threshold document (see
chapter 2).

248. The police have a power to remove a child to suitable accommodation under
section 46 of the Children Act 1989, if they have reasonable cause to believe that the
child would otherwise be likely to suffer significant harm. Statutory powers to enter
premises can be used with this section 46 power, and in circumstances to ensure the
child’s immediate protection 141. Police powers can help in emergency situations, but
should be used only when necessary and, wherever possible, the decision to remove a
child from a parent or carer should be made by a court. This can include circumstances
where the significant harm is from outside the home 142 143.

249. Restrictions and safeguards exist in relation to the circumstances and periods for
which children may be taken to or held in police stations. PCCs are responsible for health
commissioning in police custody settings and should always ensure that this meets the
needs of individual children.

250. Using Civil Orders powers available to police and partners can be an effective tool
to disrupt those who are targeting children for criminal purposes. The Child Exploitation




140
    Further information on “debt bondage” can be found at County lines offending: the Crown Prosecution Service
141
    Potential powers of entry include those under:
•     Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) section 17(1)(b), a constable may enter and search any premises for the purpose
      of arresting a person for an indictable offence
•     PACE section 17(1)(e), a constable may also enter and search premises for the purpose of saving life or limb or preventing
      serious damage to property – in the exercise of police protection powers, if entry to premises is refused, this section may give
      adequate powers
•     common law, where a constable has the power to enter premises to prevent or deal with a breach of the peace (which is
      preserved under PACE section 17(6))
•     Children Act 1989 section 48, a warrant may be obtained to search for children who may be in need of emergency protection
142
    A child under police protection should not be brought to a police station except in exceptional circumstances, such as a lack of
immediately available local authority accommodation, and then only for a short period. College of Policing: Police response to concern
for a child College of Policing (www.college.police.uk)
143
    College of Policing: Arrest and other positive approaches; College of Policing: Protective measures and civil orders




                                                                114
Disruption Toolkit 144 lists a range of useful tools available to frontline professionals in
disrupting child criminal exploitation activity. For example, Slavery and Trafficking Risk
Orders, and Slavery and Trafficking Prevention Orders can place prohibitions on the
offender in order to disrupt child criminal exploitation activity.

Adult social care services
251. Local authorities provide services to adults who are themselves responsible for
children who may be in need. These services are subject to the section 11 duties set out
in this chapter. When staff are providing services to adults, they should ask whether there
are children in the family and take actions to respond if the children need help or
protection from harm. Additional parenting support could be particularly needed where the
adults have mental health problems, misuse drugs or alcohol, are in a violent relationship,
have complex needs or have learning difficulties.

252. Local authority services to adults must consider whether any children are providing
care to the adult and whether the young carers are in need of support 145. In such cases,
or when requested by a parent or the young carer, the authority is under a duty to conduct
a young carers’ needs assessment under section 17ZA of the Children Act 1989 (see
chapter 3, paragraphs 192-193).

253. Adults with parental responsibilities for disabled children have a right to a separate
parent carer’s needs assessment under section 17ZD of the Children Act 1989. Adults
who do not have parental responsibility, but are caring for a disabled child, are entitled to
an assessment on their ability to provide, or to continue to provide, care for that disabled
child under the Carers (Recognition and Services) Act 1995 146. That assessment must
also consider whether the carer works or wishes to work, or whether they wish to engage
in any education, training, or recreation activities.

254. Adult social care services should liaise with children’s social care services to
ensure that there is a joined-up approach when both carrying out such assessments and
in the provision of support to families where there are young carers or parent carers.

Housing services
255. Housing and homelessness services in local authorities and others, such as
environmental health organisations, are subject to the section 11 duties set out in this
chapter. Practitioners working in these services may become aware of conditions that




144
    The government’s child exploitation disruption toolkit was updated in July 2022 to set out tools and tactics to support the use of
statutory powers such as civil orders that are available to frontline safeguarding agencies.
145
    The Care and Support (Assessment) Regulations 2014 Regulation 4
146
    Carers (Recognition and Services) Act 1995




                                                                  115
could have or are having an adverse impact on children. Under Part 1 of the Housing Act
2004 147, authorities must take account of the impact of health and safety hazards in
housing on vulnerable occupants, including children, when deciding on the action to be
taken by landlords to improve conditions. Housing authorities also have an important role
to play in safeguarding vulnerable young people, including young people who are
pregnant, leaving care or a secure establishment.

Homelessness duty
256. The Homelessness Reduction Act 2017 significantly reformed England’s
homelessness legislation by placing duties on local authorities to intervene at earlier
stages to prevent homelessness in their areas.

257. It added section 213B into the Housing Act 1996 148, which is a duty on certain
public authorities to refer to a housing authority service users they consider are or may be
homeless or threatened with homelessness (meaning it is likely they will become
homeless within 56 days).

258. The duty to refer applies to all social services functions, including early help,
leaving care and child protection, and is intended to increase early identification and
intervention, which is critical for safeguarding against homelessness. Earlier intervention
can help prevent children becoming homeless, and the possibility of them being
considered ‘intentionally homeless’ and so not owed a long-term housing duty.

259.       Before making a referral, a public authority must:
       •   have the individual’s consent to the referral (although referrals without consent may
           be made in order to safeguard children or vulnerable adults, in accordance with
           local procedures)
       •   allow the individual to identify the housing authority in England which they would
           like the notification to be made to
       •   have consent from the individual that their contact details can be supplied so the
           housing authority can contact them regarding the referral

260. The referral to a housing authority must include the individual’s name, contact
details, and the agreed reason for referral (for example, that the individual is homeless or
at risk of homelessness). Further referral information may include:




147
      Housing Act 2004 Part 1
148
      Housing Act 1996 Section 213B




                                               116
      •   whether an individual is already homeless, and if not when they are likely to
          become homeless
      •   whether the individual is at risk of rough sleeping on the date the referral is made
          and if so whether this is imminent
      •   risk assessment information, considering risks to the individual and to others
      •   key medical information where relevant

261. Full guidance can be found in the Homelessness Code of Guidance 149. Further
guidance on how social care and housing authorities should work together to prevent
those aged 16 and 17 from becoming homeless, and how the duty to refer should operate
in this context, can be found in the ‘Prevention of homelessness and provision of
accommodation for 16 and 17 year old young people who may be homeless and/or
require accommodation guidance’ 150.

British Transport Police
262. The British Transport Police (BTP) is subject to the section 11 duties set out in this
chapter. In its role as the national police for the railways, the BTP can provide a useful
insight beyond the geographical footprint of local authority areas. They also play an
important role in safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children, especially in
identifying and supporting children who have run away, who are missing, at risk of suicide,
sexual abuse or who are being exploited by criminal gangs, such as the movement of
drugs through county lines drug dealing.

263. The BTP should carry out its duties in accordance with its legislative powers,
working closely with safeguarding partners. This includes investigating offences
perpetrated against children, such as through the Modern Slavery Act 2015 where
children have been exploited, removing a child to a suitable place using their police
protection powers under the Children Act 1989 151, and the protection of children who are
truanting from school using powers under the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 152.

The Prison Service
264. The Prison Service, including privately managed prisons, is subject to the section
11 duties set out in this chapter. Prison staff have a responsibility to initiate or follow up a




149
    Homelessness code of guidance for local authorities
150
    Provision of accommodation for 16 and 17 year old young people who may be homeless and/or require accommodation
151
    Children Act 1989 Section 46
152
    Crime and Disorder Act 1998




                                                           117
child safeguarding enquiry 153 with children’s services at the earliest opportunity for all
newly sentenced prisoners. If circumstances for the prisoner have changed, prison staff
must make a new child safeguarding enquiry.

265. The Prison Service have a responsibility to identify prisoners who present an
ongoing risk to children from within custody and are assessed as a potential or confirmed
‘person posing a risk to children’ (PPRC) 154,155. Where an individual has been identified as
a PPRC, the relevant prison establishment should:
      •   inform the local authority children’s social care service (in the prisoner's home area
          and the home area of any identified child at risk where this is different) of the
          prisoner’s reception to prison, subsequent transfers, release on temporary licence,
          and release date and address of the offender
      •   consult with children’s social care about any significant change in circumstances,
          including if the PPRC initiates a request to change their name
      •   notify the relevant Probation Service or youth offending team of the offender’s
          PPRC status. Alert the police to the release date and address 156,157
      •   decide on the level of contact, if any, to be allowed between the PPRC and children
          based on the prison’s child contact risk assessment and prevent or restrict a
          prisoner’s contact with children where necessary. The prison’s decision should take
          into account any risk information provided by other relevant agencies, this may
          include the police, probation, health, and children’s social care
      •   make referrals to the relevant children's social care department 158 where the child
          is not known and there are concerns about prisoner contact
      •   record information children's social care have shared as required in assessments
          and case notes

266. The primary carer of a child may contact the prison to request a restriction on contact
between the prisoner and child. Requests can be made to the HMPPS Unwanted Prisoner
Contact Team, contact details are:




153
    HMPPS child safeguarding policy framework sets out that a child safeguarding enquiry (sometimes referred to as a safeguarding
check) is an official enquiry that HMPPS staff send to local authority’s children’s services to request information on an individual, child
or family.
154
    This applies not just to adult prisons but also to all types of establishments within the secure estate for children, with the same
process applying to children who pose a risk to other children.
155
    HMP public protection manual
156
    If the PPRC have been released under probation supervision, the prison no longer has responsibility for them, and it falls to the
relevant Probation Delivery Unit to address and manage the risk in the community.
157
    The management of an individual who presents a risk of harm to children will often be through the prisons multidisciplinary
interdepartmental risk management team meetings.
158
    The referral will be sent to the local authority in which the child lives




                                                                  118
      •   email – unwantedprisonercontact@justice.gov.uk
      •   telephone – 0300 060 6699, Monday to Friday, 9am to 4pm
      •   website – GOV.UK/stop-prisoner-contact

267. A prison can monitor a prisoner’s communication (including letters and telephone
calls) to protect children where it is proportionate and necessary to the risk presented.

268. Prison governors should ensure there is a clear process for children’s social care
practitioners to engage prisoners who are involved in safeguarding or child protection
procedures. This may be via face-to-face visits or virtual conferencing. All prisons have an
Offender Management Unit (OMU) with a telephone or functional mailbox which can be
found at Prisons in England and Wales - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk), this should be the first
point of contact for agencies who need to contact a prisoner or OMU. Agencies or
organisations who need to find a prisoner should follow the instructions outlined at Find a
prisoner - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)

269. Each prison should have arrangements in place that take account of the needs of
children who have parents in prison. During a prisoner’s first night induction, they will be
supported to make suitable care arrangements for any dependent children. Prisons can
work with children’s social care services and other agencies to contribute to improved
outcomes for children who are impacted by parental imprisonment. The Prison Service
should:

      •   provide facilities for children to play whilst visiting a prisoner
      •   ensure the visitors’ area caters for the needs of children and promotes a positive
          and safe experience
      •   ask all prisoners during their initial custody screening process whether they have
          caring responsibilities for any children under the age of 18
      •   review who is looking after the dependent children of prisoners, and inform
          children’s social care services if they have concerns about a child’s safety or
          wellbeing

270. Prison staff may also use the National Information Centre on Children of Offenders
(NICCO) website 159 to find local services who can support children who are impacted by
parental imprisonment. Further support for families can be found at Error! Hyperlink
reference not valid.




159
   National information centre on children of offenders (NICCO) is delivered by Barnardo’s in partnership with HM Prison and
Probation Service




                                                               119
271. Prisons should encourage and assist prisoners to maintain relationships with their
families, including children, to support their social rehabilitation wherever it is appropriate
and safe to do so 160161.

Mother and baby units in prisons
272. Mother and baby units (MBUs) are discrete specialist accommodation, within some
prisons, for female prisoners with children up to age of 18 months or above, where
appropriate. Governors or Directors of prisons which have MBUs have a duty of care to
the child. When a woman applies for a place on a MBU, the referral for assessment must
be sent to children’s social care in the mother’s home area at the earliest opportunity and
must include information on MBU provision and policy 162.

273. The prison should actively engage children’s social care to ensure the relevant
input into processes and individual cases. Practitioners should be provided with
information on the purpose, facilities and support available on the MBU. Opportunities for
practitioners to visit the MBU should be offered and encouraged.

274. Prisons must consult children’s social care on all MBU Board decisions, including
decisions relating to a change in placement, and any other matters relevant to promoting
the welfare and safeguarding a child 163164.

The Probation Service
275. The Probation Service is a statutory criminal justice agency that supervises adult
offenders serving community sentences, or who are subject to licensed supervision
following release from custody. Probation staff also deliver resettlement work in prisons,
undertake pre-sentence assessments, provide advice to courts, deliver targeted
interventions and work with victims. The purpose of the Probation Service is to protect the
public by reducing reoffending and improve offender rehabilitation. During the course of
their duties, probation practitioners will come into contact with individuals who:
      •   have offended against a child
      •   pose a risk of harm to children even though they have not been convicted of an
          offence against a child




160
     This reflects the requirements of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR): respect for family life and private
life. Under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, a public authority is obliged to act compatibly with ECHR rights, including article 8.
Both the Secretary of State for Justice and governors are bound by section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. Prison governors must
ensure that the local prison approach to the family-ties strategy is sufficient to ensure compliance with article 8 and section 6.
161
     Strengthening Prisoners Family Ties Policy Framework
162
     Pregnancy, Mother and Baby Units (MBUs), and Maternal Separation from Children up to the Age of Two in Women’s Prisons
163
     Pregnancy, MBUs and maternal separation in women’s prisons Policy Framework
164
     Pregnancy, Mother and Baby Units (MBUs), and Maternal Separation from Children up to the Age of Two in Women’s Prisons




                                                                  120
      •   are parents or carers of children
      •   have regular contact with a child for whom they do not have caring responsibility

276. The timely communication of safeguarding concerns between the Probation
Service, children’s social care and other agencies is an important part of safeguarding
and promoting the welfare of a child. On the day an offender is being sentenced, the
courts may ask the Probation Service to provide sentencing advice and an assessment of
the offender’s risk. Probation staff will make child safeguarding enquiries 165 with children’s
social care about whether they have information about children which may impact on the
safety of different sentencing options (for example, the use of an electronically monitored
curfew at the home address). They may request a response on the same day. Probation
staff should incorporate considerations about the potential impact on children of any
proposal they make to the court so that they are safe and appropriate. Probation staff
working in prisons and in community teams may also undertake child safeguarding
enquiries and should request a quick response if there are concerns about an offender
having contact with a child.

277. Probation staff should make child safeguarding enquiries and share information
with children’s social care to inform sentencing advice and ongoing management of
offenders, including the impact any offender may have on the safety or wellbeing of a
child. Probation will send child safeguarding enquiries to the local authority in which the
child and offender live. Each Probation Delivery Unit (PDU) 166 should have arrangements
in place with children’s social care for exchanging information. This includes responding to
information sharing requests from local authorities regarding prospective foster carers and
adoptive parents. If an offender who poses a risk to an identified child moves to another
address which is in a different local authority, the probation practitioner should ensure the
local authority where the offender lives is made aware. Probation should share the details
of the offender and the identified child at risk.

278. The Probation Service ensures every offender undergoes a thorough risk
assessment 167 to understand the risk they pose, and the factors related to their offending.
Where appropriate this assessment will be informed by a range of agencies, which may
include children’s social care, police, healthcare services, housing, and other voluntary
organisations. Probation practitioners will develop a sentence plan and where necessary



165
    The HMPPS child safeguarding policy framework sets out that a child safeguarding enquiry (sometimes referred to as a
safeguarding check) is an official enquiry that HMPPS staff send to local authority children’s social care to request information on an
individual, child or family.
166
    Including the National Security Division (NSD). The NSD is part of the Probation Service. It is a specialist division that works across
England and Wales in 5 geographical units (Midlands, London/Kent/Surrey/Sussex, Wales, North, East of England/South Central). It
manages those offenders who pose the highest risk of harm, including those convicted of terrorism offences or those who pose a
national security terrorist risk. Other cohorts managed include some serious organised crime and critical public protection cases.
167
    HMPPS risk of serious harm assessments and guidance provides information regarding the specialist tools HMPPS practitioners
use to assess the risk posed by an offender




                                                                  121
a risk management plan (RMP) which contains any specific measures required to manage
and reduce the risk of harm to children. When appropriate, the Probation Service should
share risk assessments and RMPs with other organisations and agencies involved in the
management of the offender’s risk. Probation practitioners will also work with children’s
social care to ensure that RMPs align with child protection and child in need plans.

279. The sentence plan includes specific child safeguarding objectives for those
offenders who pose a risk of serious harm to children or where there are child
safeguarding concerns. Probation practitioners will also consider how a planned
intervention might affect the offender’s caring or parental responsibilities or contribute to
improved outcomes for children known to be in an existing relationship with the offender.

280. Probation practitioners are experienced in working with offenders and assessing
risk. Suitably qualified probation practitioners will attend child protection conferences, core
group meetings and other child safeguarding meetings where required. They will provide
an assessment of the offender’s risk and will assess how the offender’s behaviour might
impact the wellbeing of children. Probation practitioners should prepare and submit
reports in a timely way 168.

281. The Probation Service may hold valuable information on the parents of a child who
is known to children’s social care and other agencies. The probation caseload is
predominantly male and includes men who pose a risk to children, and men who may play
a nurturing role, and have a positive impact on a child’s wellbeing. These men can often
go unseen 169 by agencies who do not ordinarily come into contact with men in the criminal
justice system. This puts the Prison and Probation Service in a unique position to
contribute to safeguarding work other agencies undertake with children and families.

Multi-agency public protection arrangements
282. Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA) is the set of arrangements
through which the Police, Probation and Prison Services (known as the Responsible
Authority) work together with other agencies to manage the risks posed by violent, sexual
and terrorism offenders living in the community to protect the public.

283. MAPPA is not a statutory body but is a mechanism through which agencies can
better discharge their statutory responsibilities and protect the public in a co-ordinated
manner. Agencies retain their full statutory responsibilities and obligations.




168
    The HMPPS child safeguarding policy framework sets out how probation practitioners are expected to participate in formal
meetings with children’s social care
169
    Unseen men: learning from case reviews: NSPCC Learning




                                                               122
284. Section 325(3) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 170 requires the Responsible
Authority (RA) to co-operate with certain agencies, such as local authorities, including
Children’s Social Care. They are known as Duty to Co-operate Agencies (DTC agencies).
This is a reciprocal duty, the Criminal Justice Act 2003 obliges DTC agencies to co-
operate with the RA in establishing arrangements and includes co-operating with other
DTC agencies. DTC agencies are required to co-operate as far as they can, consistent
with the exercise of their statutory functions.

285. Representatives from other agencies or individuals that do not have a statutory
Duty to Cooperate under MAPPA (Associate Agencies) may be included in MAPPA on a
case-by-case basis where that agency or individual can contribute to the risk assessment
and management of a MAPPA offender. Potential Associate Agencies covered by
Working Together include:
       •    independent schools, academies, and free and maintained schools
       •    early years and childcare
       •    private sector healthcare
       •    designated health professionals
       •    the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
       •    voluntary, charity, social enterprise, faith-based organisations, and private sectors.
       •    sports clubs/organisations
       •    youth services and youth work organisations

286. Whenever a child is discussed at a MAPPA meeting, the meeting must ensure that
it considers its responsibilities to safeguard and promote the welfare of that child and how
their life may be impacted by the behaviour of an offender. Where a child is managed
under MAPPA the risk of harm the child presents to others must be addressed but
children convicted of an offence or who are alleged to have engaged in offending
behaviour are entitled to the same safeguards and protection as any other child and due
regard should be given to their welfare at all times.

287. The purpose of sharing information about individuals (data subjects) under MAPPA
is to enable the relevant agencies to work together more effectively in assessing risks and
considering how to manage them in order to protect the public. Agencies should share all
relevant information, so that public protection is not compromised, while respecting the
rights of data subjects, which may limit what can be shared. These rights are set out in
Part 3 of the Data Protection Act 2018 and Article 8 of the European Convention on



170
      Criminal Justice Act 2003 Section 325 (3)




                                                  123
Human Rights. In summary, the principles derived require that information sharing is
lawful, necessary, and proportionate.

288. Section 325(4) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 provides a lawful basis for sharing
information between RA and DTC agencies 171. It also states that all DTC agencies qualify
as competent authorities when fulfilling their obligations under MAPPA. This means that
all information sharing under MAPPA is governed by Part 3 of the Data Protection Act
2018, rather than UK GDPR 172.

Serious violence duty
289. The Serious Violence Duty was introduced as part of the Police Crime Sentencing
and Courts Act 2022 173 and requires specified authorities namely police, Justice
(Probation and YOTs), Fire and Rescue Service, Health (ICBs) in England, and Local
Health Boards in Wales, and local authorities to work together to prevent and reduce
serious violence. This includes identifying the kinds of serious violence 174 that occur in the
area, the causes of that violence (so far as it is possible to do so), and to prepare and
implement a strategy for preventing, and reducing serious violence in the area.

290. The Duty also requires the specified authorities to consult relevant authorities,
namely educational, prison and youth custody authorities for the area in the preparation of
their strategy. The Duty takes a multi-agency approach to understand the causes and
consequences of serious violence, focusing on prevention and early intervention, and
informed by evidence. It does not require new multi-agency structures and encourages
the use of existing local structures and partnerships to prevent and reduce serious
violence and ultimately improve community safety and safeguarding.

291. The Duty provisions commenced on 31 January 2023 and local partners will then
have to publish their first serious violence strategy by 31 January 2024 and then review it
as appropriate. Statutory guidance to support authorities in meeting the Duty
requirements was published in December 2022 175.

Children’s homes
292. The registered person of a children’s home, including Secure Children’s Homes
must have regard to the Guide to the Children’s Homes Regulations 176, including the



171
    Criminal Justice Act 2003 Section 325 (4)
172
    Multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA): guidance
173
    Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022
174
    Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 Section 13 makes clear that violence is not limited to physical violence against the
person. It provides that, for the purposes of the duty, violence includes domestic abuse, sexual offences, violence against property and
threats of violence but does not include terrorism.
175
    Serious Violence Duty statutory guidance
176
    Children’s homes regulations, including quality standards: guide




                                                                124
quality standards (April 2015) 177, in interpreting and meeting the Regulations. The Guide
covers the quality standards for children’s homes, which set out the aspirational and
positive outcomes that we expect homes to achieve, including the standard for the
protection of children. The registered person is responsible for ensuring that staff
continually and actively assess the risks to each child and the arrangements in place to
protect them. Where there are safeguarding concerns for a child, their placement plan,
agreed between the home and their placing authority, must include details of the steps the
home will take to manage any assessed risks on a day-to-day basis.

293. In addition to the requirements of this standard, the registered person has specific
responsibilities under regulation 34 of the Children’s Homes Regulations 178 to prepare
and implement policies setting out:
      •   arrangements for the safeguarding of children from abuse, neglect, and exploitation
      •   clear procedures for referring child protection concerns to the placing authority or
          local authority where the home is situated if appropriate
      •   specific procedures to prevent children going missing and take action if they do

294. Each home should work with their local safeguarding partners to agree how they
will work together, and with the placing authority, to make sure that the needs of the
individual children are met.

The secure estate for children
295. Governors, managers, directors and principals of the following secure
establishments are subject to the section 11 duties set out in this chapter:
      •   secure training centres
      •   young offender institutions

296. Each centre holding those aged under 18 should have in place an annually
reviewed safeguarding children policy. The policy is designed to promote and safeguard
the welfare of children and should cover all relevant operational areas as well as key
supporting processes, which would include issues such as child protection, risk of harm,
restraint, separation, staff recruitment and information sharing. A manager should be
appointed and will be responsible for implementation of this policy 179.




177
    The Children’s Homes (England) Regulations 2015
178
    The Children’s Homes (England) Regulations 2015 Regulation 34
179
    Detailed guidance on the safeguarding children policy, the roles of the safeguarding children manager and the safeguarding
children committee, and the role of the establishment in relation to the LSCP can be found in Prison Service Instruction (PSI) 08/2012
Care and Management of Young People.




                                                                125
297. Each centre should work with their local safeguarding partners to agree how they
will work together, and with the relevant YOT and placing authority (the Youth Custody
Service), to make sure that the needs of individual children are met.

Youth offending teams
298. Youth Offending Teams (YOTs) are subject to the section 11 duties set out in this
chapter. YOTs are multi-agency teams responsible for the supervision of children subject
to pre-court interventions and statutory court disposals 180. They are therefore well placed
to identify children known to relevant organisations and agencies as being most at risk of
offending and the contexts in which they may be vulnerable to abuse, and to undertake
work to prevent them offending or protect them from harm. YOTs should have a lead
officer responsible for ensuring safeguarding is embedded in their practice.

299. Under section 38 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 181, local authorities must,
within the delivery of youth justice services, ensure the “provision of persons to act as
appropriate adults to safeguard the interests of children detained or questioned by police
officers”.

UK Visas and Immigration, Immigration Enforcement and the
Border Force
300. Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 places upon the
Secretary of State a duty to make arrangements to take account of the need to safeguard
and promote the welfare of children in discharging functions relating to immigration,
asylum, nationality and customs. These functions are discharged on behalf of the
Secretary of State by UK Visas and Immigration, Immigration Enforcement and the Border
Force, which are part of the Home Office. The statutory guidance ‘Every Child Matters:
arrangements to safeguard and promote the welfare of children’ and other guidance
relevant to the discharge of specific immigration functions set out these arrangements 182.

Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
301. The responsibility of the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
(Cafcass), as set out in the Children Act 1989, is to safeguard and promote the welfare of
individual children who are the subject of family court proceedings. This is through the
provision of independent social work advice to the court.




180
    The statutory membership of YOTs is set out in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 Section 39 (5)
181
    Crime and Disorder Act 1998 Section 38
182
    Every Child Matters: statutory guidance to the UK Border Agency on making arrangements to safeguard and promote the welfare of
children. Issued under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009




                                                             126
302. A Cafcass officer has a statutory right in public law cases to access local authority
records relating to the child concerned and any application under the Children Act 1989.
That power also extends to other records that relate to the child and the wider functions of
the local authority, or records held by an authorised organisation that relate to that child.

303. Where a Cafcass officer has been appointed by the court as a child’s guardian and
the matter before the court relates to specified proceedings, they should be invited to all
formal planning meetings convened by the local authority in respect of the child. This
includes statutory reviews of children who are accommodated or looked after, child
protection conferences and relevant adoption panel meetings.

The armed services
304. Local authorities have the statutory responsibility for safeguarding and promoting
the welfare of the children of service families in the UK 183, in discharging these
responsibilities:
      •   where a local authority requires input from the Ministry of Defence (MoD) in relation
          to safeguarding reviews or have been informed of an allegation against a serving
          person of a safeguarding nature that requires Local Authority Designated Officer
          (LADO) or equivalent involvement, they should notify the MoD 184 to promote timely
          information sharing
      •   local authorities should ensure that the MoD is made aware of any service child
          who is the subject of a child in need or child protection plan and whose family is
          about to move overseas
      •   each local authority with a United States (US) base in its area should establish
          liaison arrangements with the base commander and relevant staff. The
          requirements of English child welfare legislation should be explained clearly to the
          US authorities, so that the local authority can fulfil its statutory duties

Channel panels
305. The Counter-Terrorism and Security Act 2015 contains a duty on specified
authorities in England, Wales, and Scotland to have due regard to the need to prevent
people from being drawn into terrorism.




183
    The Ministry of Defence (MOD) is responsible for providing safeguarding support and promoting the welfare of the children of
armed forces personnel and the children of civilians working with the armed forces when those groups are based overseas. The MOD
contact is through the armed forces families safeguarding policy team at People-AFFS-Safeguarding-Mailbox@mod.gov.uk
184
    The MOD contact is through the armed forces families safeguarding policy team at People-AFFS-Safeguarding-
Mailbox@mod.gov.uk




                                                             127
306. Children can be vulnerable to the influences of extremism which could lead to
radicalisation. Channel panels, established under the Counter-Terrorism and Security Act
2015, arrange for support for individuals who have been assessed as vulnerable to being
drawn into terrorism 185 186.

307. The Children Act 1989 promotes the view that all children and their parents should
be considered as individuals and that family structures, culture, religion, ethnic origins,
and other characteristics should be respected.

308. When providing support to an individual on the Channel programme, local
authorities and their partners should consider how best to align assessments under the
Children Act 1989 to safeguard and promote the welfare of the child.

309. Links should be established between Channel panels and other statutory partners,
including safeguarding partners and YOTs.

Voluntary, charity, social enterprise, faith-based
organisations, and private sectors
310. Voluntary, charity, social enterprise (VCSE) and private sector organisations and
agencies play an important role in safeguarding children through the services they deliver.
Some of these will work with particular communities, with different races and faith
communities, and deliver via health, adult social care, housing, and Prison and Probation
Services. They may, as part of their work, provide a wide range of activities for children
and have an important role in safeguarding children and supporting families and
communities.

311. Like other organisations and agencies who work with children, they should have
appropriate arrangements in place to safeguard and protect children from harm. Many of
these organisations and agencies as well as many schools, children’s centres, early
years, and childcare organisations, will be subject to charity law and regulated either by
the Charity Commission and/or other “principal” regulators. Charity trustees are
responsible for ensuring that those benefiting from, or working with, their charity, are not
harmed in any way through contact with it. The Charity Commission for England and
Wales provides guidance on charity compliance which should be followed 187.

312. Some of these organisations and agencies are large national charities whilst others
will have a much smaller local reach. Some will be delivering statutory services and may




185
    Channel duty guidance: protecting people susceptible to radicalisation
186
    Prevent duty guidance
187
    Strategy for dealing with safeguarding issues in charities




                                                                128
be run by volunteers, such as library services. This important group of organisations
includes youth services not delivered by local authorities or district councils.

313. All practitioners working in these organisations and agencies who are working with
children and their families are subject to the same safeguarding responsibilities, whether
paid or a volunteer.

314. Every VCSE, faith-based organisation and private sector organisation or agency
should have policies in place to safeguard and protect children from harm. These should
be followed, and systems should be in place to ensure compliance in this. Individual
practitioners, whether paid or volunteer, should be aware of their responsibilities for
safeguarding and protecting children from harm, how they should respond to child
protection concerns and how to make a referral to local authority children’s social care or
the police, if necessary.

315. Every VCSE, faith-based organisation and private sector organisation or agency
should have in place the arrangements described in this chapter. They should be aware of
how they need to work with the safeguarding partners in a local area. Charities (within the
meaning of section 1 Charities Act 2011), religious organisations (regulation 34 and
schedule 3 to School Admissions) and any person involved in the provision, supervision
or oversight of sport or leisure are included within the Relevant Agency Regulations 188.
This means if the safeguarding partners name them as a relevant partner they must
cooperate. Other VCSE, faith-based and private sector organisations not on the list of
relevant agencies can also be asked to co-operate as part of the local arrangements and
should do so.

Sports clubs/organisations
316. There are many sports clubs and organisations, including voluntary and private
sector providers that deliver a wide range of sporting activities to children. Some of these
will be community amateur sports clubs, some will be charities. All should have the
arrangements described in this chapter in place and should collaborate to work effectively
with the safeguarding partners as required by any local safeguarding arrangements. Paid
and volunteer staff need to be aware of their responsibilities for safeguarding and
promoting the welfare of children, how they should respond to child protection concerns
and how to make a referral to local authority children’s social care or the police if
necessary.




188 The Child Safeguarding Practice Review and Relevant Agency (England) Regulations 2018




                                                           129
317. All National Governing Bodies of Sport that receive funding from either Sport
England 189 or UK Sport 190 should aim to meet the Standards for Safeguarding and
Protecting Children in Sport 191.




189
    Sport England
190
    UK Sport
191
    Standards for safeguarding and protecting children in sport




                                                                  130
Chapter 5: Learning from serious child safeguarding
incidents
318. Child protection in England is a complex multi-agency system with many different
organisations and individuals playing their part. Reflecting on how well that system is
working is critical in improving our response to children and their families.

319. Sometimes a child suffers a serious injury or death as a result of abuse or neglect.
Understanding not only what happened but also why it happened can help improve our
response in the future. Appreciating the impact that organisations and agencies had on
the child’s life, and on the lives of their family members, and whether or not different
approaches or those actions could have resulted in a different outcome, is essential. It is
in this way that we can make good judgements about what might need to change at a
local or national level.


Purpose of child safeguarding practice reviews
320. The purpose of serious child safeguarding case reviews, at local and national level,
is to identify improvements that can be made to safeguard and promote the welfare of
children. Learning is relevant locally but has a wider importance for all practitioners
working with children and families and for the government and policymakers.
Understanding whether there are systemic issues, and whether and how policy and
practice need to change, is critical to the system being dynamic and self-improving.

321. Reviews should seek to prevent or reduce the risk of recurrence of similar
incidents. They are not conducted to hold individuals, organisations, or agencies to
account, as there are other processes for that purpose, including employment law and
disciplinary procedures, professional regulation and, in exceptional cases, criminal
proceedings. These processes may be carried out alongside a review or at a later stage.
Employers should consider whether any disciplinary action should be taken against
practitioners whose conduct and/or practice falls below acceptable standards and should
refer to their regulatory body as appropriate.


Responsibilities for reviews
322. The responsibility for how the system learns the lessons from serious child
safeguarding incidents lies at a national level with the Child Safeguarding Practice Review
Panel (the panel) and at a local level with the safeguarding partners.




                                           131
323. The panel is responsible for identifying and overseeing the review of serious child
safeguarding cases which, in its opinion, raise issues that are complex or of national
importance. It should also oversee the system of national and local reviews and how
effectively it is operating.

324. As outlined in chapter 2, the safeguarding partners play an integral role in
establishing a system of learning and reflection locally. Safeguarding partners must:
       •    identify and review serious child safeguarding cases which, in their opinion, raise
            issues of importance in relation to their area
       •    commission and oversee the review of those cases if they consider it appropriate

325. The way in which this responsibility is divided between the lead safeguarding
partners (LSPs) and their delegates is for local decision. Accountability for ensuring
learning from serious incidents is implemented is the responsibility of the LSPs and the
impact of local and national reviews should be evidenced in yearly reports and subjected
to independent scrutiny.

326. The panel and safeguarding partners have a shared aim to identify improvements
to practice for protecting children from harm and should maintain an open and ongoing
dialogue. This will enable them to raise concerns, highlight commonly recurring areas
needing further investigation (whether leading to a local or national review), and share
learning, including from success, that could lead to improvements elsewhere.

327. As such, safeguarding partners should have regard to any guidance the panel
publishes. Guidance will include the timescales for a rapid review (see chapter 5,
paragraphs 343-344) and for the panel’s response.

328.        Serious child safeguarding cases are those in which:
       •    abuse or neglect of a child is known or suspected
       •    the child has died or been seriously harmed

329. Serious harm includes (but is not limited to) serious and/or long-term impairment of
a child’s mental health or intellectual, emotional, social, or behavioural development. This
is not an exhaustive list. When making decisions, judgement should be exercised in cases
where impairment is likely to be long-term, even if this is not immediately certain. Even if a
child recovers, including from a one-off incident, serious harm may still have occurred.
Local authorities and safeguarding partners should refer to the panel’s guidance 192 for
further clarity on issues relating to the criteria for serious child safeguarding cases.




192
      Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel guidance for safeguarding partners




                                                               132
Duty on local authorities to notify incidents to the Child
Safeguarding Practice Review Panel

  16C (1) of the Children Act 2004 (as amended by the Children and
  Social Work Act 2017) states:

  Where a local authority in England knows or suspects that a child has been abused or
  neglected, the local authority must notify the Child Safeguarding Practice Review
  Panel if:

      (a) the child dies or is seriously harmed in the local authority’s area

      (b) while normally resident in the local authority’s area, the child dies or is seriously
          harmed outside England


330. The local authority should notify the panel of any incident that meets the above
criteria via the Child Safeguarding Online Notification System. It should do so within five
working days of becoming aware it has occurred. Though the responsibility to notify rests
on the local authority, it is for all three safeguarding partners to agree which incidents
should be notified in their local area. Where there is disagreement, the safeguarding
partners should follow local dispute resolution processes.

331. The local authority must notify the Secretary of State for Education, and Ofsted of
the death of a looked after child.

332. The local authority should also notify the Secretary of State for Education and
Ofsted of the death of a care leaver up to and including the age of 24 193. This should be
notified via the Child Safeguarding Online Notification System. The death of a care leaver
does not require a rapid review or local child safeguarding practice review. However,
safeguarding partners must consider whether the criteria for a serious incident has been
met and respond accordingly, in the event the deceased care leaver was under the age of
18. If local partners think that learning can be gained from the death of a looked after child
or care leaver in circumstances where those criteria do not apply, they may wish to
undertake a local child safeguarding practice review.

333. The local authority, on behalf of the safeguarding partners, has a duty to notify the
panel about all serious incidents that meet the criteria. The number of serious incidents
notified is not a reflection of local area performance. Making a notification, will ensure that



193
    Care leavers are entitled to support from their Personal Adviser up to their 25th birthday. Local authorities are required to keep in
touch with all care leavers up the point they reach age 21, and to make their best efforts to contact all care leavers aged 21 to 24
annually to remind them that they remain eligible for support. If a young person chooses not to take up support between 21 to 24 years
of age the local authority may no longer be aware of a care leaver’s whereabouts or circumstances (and therefore their death).




                                                                 133
learning is identified and fed back into the system to prevent future harm or death. The
link to the Child Safeguarding Online Notification form for local authorities to notify
incidents to the panel is available on the Report a serious child safeguarding incident 194
page on GOV.UK.

334. The Department for Education (DfE) is responsible for publishing annual serious
incident data. This data is extracted from the notifications submitted by local authorities,
so accuracy when completing the online notification form is key. All incidents meeting the
criteria should be notified as “serious harm” or “death”, except where there is a clear
reason to notify as “other”, for example, in cases where the notification relates to a
perpetrator. A notification regarding the suicide of a child should be made where abuse or
neglect is a factor.

335. Others who have functions relating to children 195 should inform the safeguarding
partners of any incident they think should be considered for a child safeguarding practice
review.


Decisions on local and national reviews
336.      Safeguarding partners must:
      •   identify serious child safeguarding cases that raise issues of importance in relation
          to their area
      •   commission and oversee the review of those cases if they consider review
          appropriate

337.    When a serious incident becomes known to safeguarding partners, they must
consider whether the case meets the criteria and guidance for a local review 196. If
safeguarding partners determine that the criteria is met to undertake a local child
safeguarding practice review, then a serious incident notification and rapid review must
take place.

338. In some cases, a ‘serious child safeguarding case’ may not meet the criteria for a
serious incident notification but may nevertheless raise issues of importance to the local
area. That might, for example, include where there has been good practice, poor practice
or where there have been ‘near-miss’ incidents. Safeguarding partners may choose to
undertake a local child safeguarding practice review in these or other circumstances, in




194
    Report a serious child safeguarding incident
195
    This means any person or organisation with statutory or official duties or responsibilities relating to children
196
    Children Act 2004 Section 16F




                                                                   134
which case they should be clear about their rationale for undertaking such a review and
what its focus will be.

339. It is for safeguarding partners to determine whether a review is appropriate, given
that the purpose of a review is to identify improvements to practice. Meeting the criteria
does not mean that safeguarding partners must automatically carry out a local child
safeguarding practice review.

340. All incidents should be considered on a case-by-case basis using all information
that is available to local safeguarding arrangements. Issues might appear to be the same
in some cases, but reasons for actions and behaviours may differ resulting in useful
learning for the local area.

341. Decisions on whether to undertake reviews should be made transparently and
collaboratively between safeguarding partners, and the rationale recorded and
communicated appropriately, including to families. Where there are disagreements, local
dispute resolution processes should be followed.

342. Learning from local reviews should be reflected in the annual reports published
yearly by the safeguarding partners.

      The criteria safeguarding partners must take into account include whether the
      case 197:

        •    highlights or may highlight improvements needed to safeguard and promote the
             welfare of children, including where those improvements have been previously
             identified
        •    highlights or may highlight recurrent themes in the safeguarding and promotion of
             the welfare of children
        •    highlights or may highlight concerns regarding two or more organisations or
             agencies working together effectively to safeguard and promote the welfare of
             children
        •    is one the panel has considered and has concluded a local review may be more
             appropriate




197
      The Child Safeguarding Practice Review and Relevant Agency (England) Regulations 2018




                                                              135
      Safeguarding partners should also have regard to circumstances where:

       •    they have cause for concern about the actions of a single agency
       •    there has been no agency involvement, and this gives them cause for concern
       •    more than one local authority, police area or ICB is involved, including in cases
            where a family has moved around
       •    the case may raise issues related to safeguarding or promoting the welfare of
            children in institutional settings 198



The rapid review
343. The safeguarding partners should promptly undertake a rapid review of the case, in
line with any guidance published by the panel. The aim of this review is to enable them to:
      •    gather the facts about the case, as far as they can be readily established
      •    discuss whether any immediate action is needed to ensure children’s safety and
           share any learning appropriately
      •    consider the potential for identifying improvements to safeguard and promote the
           welfare of children
      •    decide what steps they should take next, including whether to undertake a child
           safeguarding practice review

344. As soon as the rapid review is complete, the safeguarding partners should send a
copy of their findings to the panel 199. They should also share with the panel their decision
about whether a local child safeguarding practice review is appropriate, or whether they
think the case may raise issues that are complex or of national importance such that a
national review may be appropriate. They may also do this if, during a local child
safeguarding practice review, new information comes to light suggesting that a national
review may be appropriate. As soon as they have determined that a local review will be
carried out, they should inform the panel, Ofsted and DfE, providing the name of the
reviewer they have commissioned.




198
    Includes children’s homes (including secure children’s homes) and other settings with residential provision for children, custodial
settings where a child is held (including police custody, young offender institutions and secure training centres), and all settings where
detention of a child takes place, including under the Mental Health Act 1983 or the Mental Capacity Act 2005
199
    The panel may share this with the DfE, if requested, to enable DfE to carry out its functions.




                                                                  136
Guidance for the National Child Safeguarding Practice Review
Panel
345. On receipt of the information from the rapid review, the panel must decide whether
it is appropriate to commission a national review of a case or cases. They must consider
the criteria and guidance that follows:

      The criteria the panel must take into account include whether the case 200:
       •   highlights or may highlight improvements needed to safeguard and promote the
           welfare of children, including where those improvements have been previously
           identified
       •   raises or may raise issues requiring legislative change or changes to guidance
           issued under or further to any enactment
       •   highlights or may highlight recurrent themes in the safeguarding and promotion of
           the welfare of children
      The panel should also have regard to:
       •   circumstances where significant harm or death to a child educated otherwise
           than at school
       •   circumstances where a child is seriously harmed or dies while in the care of a
           local authority, or while on (or recently removed from) a child protection plan
       •   circumstances where the case may raise issues relating to safeguarding or
           promoting the welfare of children in institutional settings 201
       •   cases which involve a range of types of abuse 202



346. As well as considering a notification from a local authority, information from a rapid
review and local child safeguarding practice reviews, the panel should consider a range of
other evidence, including inspection and other reports and research. The panel may also
consider any other criteria it considers appropriate to identify whether a serious child
safeguarding case raises issues that are complex or of national importance.




200
    The Child Safeguarding Practice Review and Relevant Agency (England) Regulations 2018
201
    Includes children’s homes (including secure children’s homes) and other settings with residential provision for children, custodial
settings where a child is held (including police custody, young offender institutions and secure training centres), and all settings where
detention of a child takes place, including under the Mental Health Act 1983 or the Mental Capacity Act 2005
202
    For example, trafficking for the purposes of child sexual exploitation




                                                                  137
347. In many cases there will need to be dialogue between the safeguarding partners
and the panel to support the decision-making process. The safeguarding partners must
share further information with the panel if requested.

348. The panel should inform the relevant safeguarding partners promptly following
receipt of the rapid review, if it considers that:

       •   a national review is appropriate, setting out the rationale for its decision and the
           next steps
       •   further information is required to support its decision-making, including whether the
           safeguarding partners have decided to commission a local review

349. The panel should decide on whether to undertake a national review and
communicate its rationale appropriately, including to families. The panel should notify the
Secretary of State if it decides to carry out a national review.

350. On receipt of the information from a rapid review or following its appraisal of a
number of rapid reviews that highlight a particular theme, the panel must decide whether it
is appropriate to commission a national review of a case, or cases, or to undertake a
thematic review. For the criteria and guidance that the panel considers in its decision-
making, refer to its guidance 203

351. If the panel decides to undertake a national review, it should discuss with the
safeguarding partners its potential scope and methodology and how they it will engage
with them and those involved in the case.

352. There will be instances where a local review has been carried out which could then
form part of a thematic review that the panel undertakes at a later date. There may be
other instances where a local review has not been carried out but where the panel
considers that the case could be helpful to a future national review. In such
circumstances, the panel should engage with safeguarding partners to agree how the
review should be conducted.

353. Alongside any national or local reviews, there could be a criminal investigation, a
coroner’s investigation and/or professional body disciplinary procedures. The panel and
the safeguarding partners should have in place clear processes for how they contribute to
with other investigations (including a domestic homicide review, multi-agency public
protection arrangements, or safeguarding adult’s reviews), and collaborate with those




203
      Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel




                                                 138
responsible for carrying them out. This will reduce the burdens on, and anxiety for, the
children and families concerned as well as uncertainty and duplication of effort.


Commissioning a reviewer(s) for a local child safeguarding
practice review
354. The safeguarding partners are responsible for commissioning and supervising
reviewers for local reviews 204.

355.        In all cases they should consider whether the reviewer has:

       •    professional knowledge, understanding and practice relevant to local child
            safeguarding practice reviews, including the ability to engage with practitioners,
            children, and families
       •    knowledge and understanding of research relevant to children’s safeguarding
            issues
       •    ability to recognise the complex circumstances in which practitioners work together
            to safeguard children
       •    the ability to understand practice from the viewpoint of the individuals,
            organisations or agencies involved at the time rather than using hindsight
       •    the ability to communicate findings effectively
       •    any real or perceived conflict of interest


Local child safeguarding practice reviews
356. The safeguarding partners should agree with the reviewer the method by which the
review should be conducted, taking into account this guidance and the principles of the
systems methodology recommended by the Munro review 205. It should provide a way of
looking at and analysing frontline practice as well as organisational structures and
learning, and allow those involved in the review to reach recommendations that will
improve outcomes for children. All reviews should reflect both the child’s perspective and
the family context.




204
      Safeguarding partners may also consider appointing reviewers from the panels pool of reviewers, where available
205
      The Munro review of child protection final report: a child-centred system (2011)




                                                                 139
357. The review should be proportionate to the circumstances of the case, focus on
potential learning, and establish and explain the reasons the incidents occurred as they
did.

358. As part of their duty to ensure the review is of satisfactory quality, the safeguarding
partners should ensure that:
      •   practitioners are fully involved and invited to contribute their perspectives without
          fear of being blamed for actions they took in good faith
      •   families, including surviving children (in order that the child is at the centre of the
          process) are invited to contribute
      •   families understand how they are going to be involved and have their expectations
          appropriately and sensitively managed

359. The safeguarding partners must supervise the review to ensure the reviewer is
making satisfactory progress and the review is of satisfactory quality 206. They may request
information from the reviewer to enable them to assess this and any such requests must
be made in writing. The President of the Family Division’s guidance covering the role of
the judiciary in serious case reviews 207 should also be noted in the context of child
safeguarding practice reviews.


Safeguarding partners – expectations of the final report
360.      The safeguarding partners must ensure the final report includes:
      •   a summary of any recommended improvements to be made by individuals or
          organisations in the area to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
      •   an analysis of any systemic or underlying reasons actions were taken or not taken
          in respect of matters covered by the report

361. Any recommendations should make clear what is required of relevant agencies and
others both collectively and individually, and by when, and focussed on improving
outcomes for children.

362. Reviews are about promoting and sharing information about improvements, both
within the area and potentially beyond, so the safeguarding partners must publish the
report, unless they consider it inappropriate to do so 208. In such a circumstance, they must



206
    Children Act 2004 Section 16F (1) and The Child Safeguarding Practice Review and Relevant Agency (England) Regulations 2018
Regulation 15
207
    President of the Family Division’s guidance covering the role of the judiciary in serious case reviews
208
    Children Act 2004 Section 16F (1) and The Child Safeguarding Practice Review and Relevant Agency (England) Regulations 2018
Regulation 15




                                                            140
publish any information about the improvements that should be made following the review
they consider appropriate to publish. The name of the reviewers should be included.
Published reports or information must be publicly available for at least one year.

363. When compiling and preparing to publish the report, the delegated safeguarding
partners should consider carefully how best to manage the impact of the publication on
children, family members, practitioners and others closely affected by the case. The
safeguarding partners should ensure that reports are written in such a way so that what is
published avoids harming the welfare of any children or vulnerable adults involved in the
case.

364. Safeguarding partners must send a copy of the full report to the panel and to the
Secretary of State no later than seven working days 209 before the date of publication.
Where the safeguarding partners decide only to publish information relating to the
improvements to be made following the review, they must also provide a copy of that
information to the panel and the Secretary of State within the same timescale. They
should also provide the report, or information about improvements, to Ofsted within the
same timescale.

365. Depending on the nature and complexity of the case, the report should be
completed and published as soon as possible and no later than six months from the date
of the decision to initiate a review. Where other proceedings may have an impact on or
delay publication, (for example, an ongoing criminal investigation, inquest or future
prosecution), the safeguarding partners should inform the panel and the Secretary of
State of the reasons for the delay. Safeguarding partners should also set out for the panel
and the Secretary of State the justification for any decision not to publish either the full
report or information relating to improvements. Safeguarding partners should have regard
to any comments that the panel or the Secretary of State may make in respect of
publication.

366.       Every effort should also be made, both before the review and while it is in progress,
to:
       •   capture points from the case about improvements needed
       •   take corrective action and disseminate learning




209
      “Working day” means any day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or bank holiday.




                                                               141
Actions in response to local and national reviews
367. The safeguarding partners should take account of the findings from their own local
reviews and from all national reviews, with a view to considering how identified
improvements should be implemented locally, including the way in which organisations
and agencies work together to safeguard and promote the welfare of children. The
safeguarding partners should highlight findings from reviews with relevant parties locally
and should regularly audit progress on the implementation of recommended
improvements 210. Improvement should be sustained through regular monitoring and follow
up of actions so that the findings from these reviews make a real impact on improving
outcomes for children.


Guidance for the Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel –
reviewers
368. The panel must set up a pool of potential reviewers who can undertake national
reviews, a list of whom must be publicly available. If they consider that there are no
potential reviewers in the pool with availability or suitable experience to undertake the
review, they may select a person who is not in the pool. When selecting a reviewer, the
panel should consider whether they have any conflict of interest which could restrict their
ability, or perceived ability, to identify improvements impartially.

369. For national child safeguarding practice reviews, the panel should follow the same
guidance on procedure and supervision as for local child safeguarding practice reviews
(see chapter 5, paragraphs 356-359).


The panel – expectations for the final report
370.        The panel must ensure that the final report includes:
       •    a summary of any improvements being recommended to the safeguarding partners
            and/or others to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
       •    an analysis of any systemic or underlying reasons why actions were taken or not
            taken in respect of matters covered by the report

371. The panel must publish the report, unless they consider it inappropriate to do so. In
such a circumstance they must publish any information about the improvements that




210
      See also Reporting section in chapter 2 (safeguarding partners’ report).




                                                                   142
should be made following the review that they consider it appropriate to publish. The
name of the reviewer should be included.

372. The panel should work with safeguarding partners to identify and manage the
impact of the publication on children, family members, practitioners and others closely
affected by the case.

373. The panel must ensure that reports or information published are publicly available
for at least three years. The panel must send a copy of the full report to the Secretary of
State no later than seven working days before the date of publication. Where the panel
decides only to publish information relating to the improvements to be made following the
review, they must also provide a copy of that information to the Secretary of State within
the same timescale. The panel should also send a copy of the report or improvements to
the relevant safeguarding partners, Ofsted, the Care Quality Commission and His
Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services.

374. Reports should be completed and published within six months of the date of the
decision to initiate a review. Where other proceedings may have an impact on or delay
publication, for example, an ongoing criminal investigation, inquest or future prosecution,
the panel should advise the Secretary of State of the reasons for the delay. The panel
should also set out for the Secretary of State the explanation for any decision not to
publish either the full report or information relating to improvements. During the review,
the panel should share any points that arise about improvements needed with the
safeguarding partners in any local authority areas covered by the review and others as
applicable.

375. The panel should send copies of published reports of national and local child
safeguarding practice reviews or published information relating to improvements that
should be made following those reviews, to Foundations (What Works Centre for Children
and Families) and relevant inspectorates, bodies, or individuals as they see fit. Where a
local review results in findings which are of national importance, or in recommendations
for national government, the panel should consider the potential of those
recommendations to improve systems to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
and how best to disseminate and embed such learning.




                                            143
How to notify a serious incident, rapid review, and local child
safeguarding practice review
Serious incident notification
All serious child safeguarding incidents must be notified to the panel.
Notifications should be sent within five working days of the local authority becoming aware
of the incident.
Notifications are made through the online notification system, which is accessible 24
hours a day.
The rapid review
Rapid reviews should be submitted to the panel within 15 working days of the incident.
This is a non-statutory requirement and more details can be found in the panel’s practice
guidance 211.
Rapid reviews should be submitted to the panel secretariat, at
Mailbox.NationalReviewPanel@education.gov.uk.

Local child safeguarding practice review

Full reports must be sent to the panel and the Secretary of State for Education 212 no later
than seven working days before the date of publication.
Final reports, information relating to improvements to be made following a review, and
reasons for any delay, should be notified to
Mailbox.NationalReviewPanel@education.gov.uk and Mailbox.CPOD@education.gov.uk
In addition, final reports and information about improvements should also be sent to
Ofsted SCR.SIN@ofsted.gov.uk




211
      Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel guidance for safeguarding partners
212
      By sending to Mailbox.CPOD@education.gov.uk




                                                                144
Chapter 6: Child death reviews
376. The death of a child is a devastating loss that profoundly affects all those involved.
The process of systematically reviewing the deaths of children is grounded in respect for
the rights of both children and their families 213, with the intention of learning what
happened and why, and preventing future child deaths.

377. The majority of child deaths in England arise from medical causes. Enquiries
should keep an appropriate balance between forensic and medical requirements and
supporting the family at a difficult time. This chapter provides guidance to child death
review partners on their statutory responsibilities.

378. Child death review partners are local authorities and any ICBs for the local area as
set out in the Children Act 2004, as amended by the Children and Social Work Act
2017 214. The statutory responsibilities for child death review partners are set out below,
and the agency and organisational boundaries should be decided locally as described in
paragraph 384 of this chapter.

379. In the immediate aftermath of a child’s death, a copy of ‘When a child dies – a
guide for parents and carers’ 215 should be offered to all bereaved families or carers
through the child death review process. In addition to supporting families and carers, staff
involved in the care of the child should also be considered and offered appropriate
support.




213
    United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
214
    Children Act 2004, Section 16Q
215
    When a child dies: a guide for parents and carers




                                                           145
Statutory requirements216
When a child dies, in any circumstances, it is important for parents and families to
understand what has happened and whether there are any lessons to be learnt.
The responsibility for ensuring child death reviews are carried out is held by ‘child death
review partners’, who, in relation to a local authority area in England, are defined as the
local authority for that area and any ICBs operating in the local authority area.
Child death review partners must make arrangements to review all deaths of children
normally resident in the local area 217 and, as indicated, of any non-resident children who
have died in their area. This should be done via a Child Death Overview Panel (CDOP).
Child death review partners for two or more local authority areas may combine and
agree that their areas be treated as a single area for the purpose of undertaking child
death reviews.
Child death review partners must make arrangements for the analysis of information
from all deaths reviewed by the National Child Mortality Database (NCMD).
The purpose of a review and/or analysis is to identify any matters relating to the death,
or deaths, that are relevant to the welfare of children in the area, or to public health and
safety, and to consider whether action should be taken in relation to any matters
identified. If child death review partners find action should be taken by a person or
organisation, they must inform them. In addition, child death review partners:
   •   must, at such times as they consider appropriate, prepare, and publish reports
       on:
              o what they have done as a result of the child death review
                arrangements in their area
              o how effective the arrangements have been in practice
   •   may request information from a person or organisation to enable or assist the
       review and/or analysis process. The person or organisation must comply with the
       request, and if they do not, the child death review partners may take legal action
       to seek enforcement
   •   may make payments directly towards expenditure incurred in connection with
       arrangements made for child death reviews or analysis of information about
       deaths reviewed, or by contributing to a fund out of which payments may be
       made. They may provide staff, goods, services, accommodation, or other
       resources to any person for purposes connected with the child death review or
       analysis process




                                            146
Responsibilities of child death review partners
380. The child death review process covers children 218, regardless of the cause of
death 219.

381. In making arrangements to review child deaths, child death review partners should
establish a structure and process to review all deaths of children normally resident in their
area and, as indicated and agreed between child death review partners, the deaths of
children not normally resident in their area but who have died there. Child death review
partners should model their child death review structures and processes as laid out in the
‘Child Death Review Statutory and Operational Guidance (2018)’ 220.

382. Child death review partners should consider the core representation of any panel
or structure they set up to conduct reviews, and this would ideally include:
      •   public health
      •   the designated 221 doctor for child deaths for the local area
      •   social services
      •   police
      •   the designated doctor or nurse for safeguarding
      •   primary care (GP or health visitor)
      •   nursing and/or midwifery
      •   lay representation
      •   other professionals that child death review partners consider should be involved
It is for child death review partners to determine what representation they have in any
structure reviewing child deaths.

383. Child death review partners should agree locally how the child death review
process will be funded in their area.




216
    The guidance in this chapter is issued under the Children Act 2004 Section 16Q
217
    For the purposes of child death reviews, a local area is the area within the remit of a local authority (referred to in the Children Act
2004 as a “local authority area”).
218
    Children Act 2004 Section 65 - a child is defined as a person under 18 years of age
219
    This will include the death of any liveborn baby, where a death certificate has been issued, or where the birth was unattended, but
does not include those (of any gestation) who are stillborn where there was medical attendance or planned terminations of pregnancy
carried out within the law.
220
    Child Death Review: Statutory and Operational Guidance (England)
221
    Within that part of the health system that supports child safeguarding and protection services, the word “designated" means a
dedicated professional with specific roles and responsibilities that are centred on the provision of clinical expertise and strategic advice.




                                                                   147
384. The geographical and population “footprint” of child death review partners should
be locally agreed but must extend to at least one local authority area. It should take into
account networks of NHS care, and agency and organisational boundaries in order to
reflect the integrated care and social networks of the local area. These may overlap with
more than one local authority area or ICB. They should cover a child population such that
they typically review at least 60 child deaths per year. Child death review partners should
come together to develop clear plans outlining the administrative and logistical processes
for their review arrangements.

385. Child death review partners should ensure that a designated doctor for child
deaths is appointed to any multi-agency panel (or structure in place to review deaths).
The designated doctor for child deaths should be a senior paediatrician who can take a
lead role in the review process. Child death review partners should ensure a process is in
place whereby the designated doctor for child deaths is notified of each child death and is
sent relevant information.

386. Child death review partners may request that a person or organisation provide
information to enable or assist the reviewing or analysing of a child's death. The person or
organisation must comply with such a request. If they do not comply, the child death
review partners may instigate legal action to enforce.

387. Child death review partners for the local authority area where a child who has died
was normally resident are responsible for ensuring the death is reviewed. However, they
may also choose to review the death of a child, including a looked after child, that
occurred in their local area even if the child in question was not normally resident there. In
such circumstances, the designated doctor for child death in each area should discuss
and agree who will be responsible for collecting information and reviewing the death, to
ensure there is no duplication of review. The review process should seek to involve child
death review partners for another local authority area who had an interest in the child or
any other person or agencies, as appropriate.

388. Child death review partners should publicise on their website, information on the
arrangements for child death reviews in their area. This should include who the
accountable officials are (the local authority chief executive, and the accountable officer of
the ICB), which local authority and ICB partners are involved, what geographical area is
covered and who the designated doctor for child deaths is.




                                            148
Responsibilities of other organisations and agencies
389. All local organisations or individual practitioners that have had involvement in the
case should co-operate, as appropriate, in the child death review process carried out by
child death review partners. All local organisations or individual practitioners should also
have regard to any guidance on child death reviews issued by the government.

Specific responsibilities of relevant bodies in relation to child
deaths
Registrars of Births and Deaths (Section 31 of the Children and Young Persons Act
2008): Requirement on registrars of births and deaths to supply child death review
partners with the particulars of the death entered in the register in relation to any person
who was or may have been under the age of 18 at the time of death. A similar
requirement exists where the registrar corrects an entry in the register.

The registrar must also notify child death review partners if they issue a Certificate of No
Liability to Register (where a death is not required by law to be registered in England or
Wales) where it appears that the deceased was or may have been under the age of 18 at
the time of death.

The information must be provided to the appropriate child death review partners (which
cover the sub-district in which the register is kept) no later than seven days from the date
the death was registered, the date the correction was made or the date the certificate was
issued.

Coroners and Justice Act 2009 & Coroners (Investigations) Regulations 2013: Duty
to investigate and hold an inquest. Powers to request a post-mortem and for evidence to
be given or produced.

Coroner’s duty to notify the child death review partners for the area in which the child died
or where the child’s body was found within three working days of deciding to investigate a
death or commission a post-mortem.

Coroner’s duty to share information, including post-mortem reports with the relevant child
death review partners.




                                            149
Responding to the death of a child: the child death review
process

                                                            A child dies




                                       Professionals in the place where the child died initiate
                                                immediate decision-making and
                                                                                                     These stages
      A key worker offers                 notifications (including the medical examiner)
                                                                                                     focus on the
        the child’s family                                                                         individual child
            ongoing                                                                               and local systems
          engagement,                         They initiate information gathering, and              and learning
          support and                  if appropriate, investigations such as a joint agency
          information                      response, coroners or an NHS England (NHSE)
                                                     serious incident framework



                                          Professionals in the place where the child died
                                                 are responsible for arranging a
                                               child death review (CDR) meeting



                                                The Child Death Overview Panel
                                            convenes an independent CDOP meeting

                                                                                                  These stages focus
                                                                                                    on local and
                                                                                                  national systems
                                        CDOP sends the National Child Mortality Database            and learning
                                            (NCMD) specified data on the death




                                            CDOP and NCMD share local and national
                                           learning with CDR and safeguarding partners



                             Figure 2: Process to follow when a child dies

390. The steps that precede the child death review partners’ independent review
commence in the immediate aftermath of a child’s death. These include the immediate
decisions, notifications and parallel investigations, and the child death review by those
directly involved in the care of the child or the investigation after their death, at the child
death review meeting. The information gathered throughout this process should be fed
into the child death overview panel review.

391. The learning from all child death reviews should be shared with the National Child
Mortality Database which may in addition consider information from other reviews in order
to identify any trends in or similarities between deaths. Information from the database will
be used to inform local or national changes to prevent future deaths.




                                                      150
392. The processes that should be followed by all those involved when responding to,
investigating, and reviewing child deaths is set out in the Child Death Review Statutory
and Operational guidance 222 on child death reviews issued by the government.

393. All practitioners participating in the child death review process should notify, report,
and scrutinise child deaths using the standardised templates 223. These should be
forwarded to the relevant CDOP.

The child death review process
A child dies
394. Practitioners in all agencies should notify the child death review partners, via the
local CDOP administrator (or equivalent) of the death of any child of which they become
aware by using the child death notification form 224.

Immediate decision-making and notifications, and investigation and
information gathering
395. Whenever a child dies, practitioners should work together in responding to that
death in a thorough, sensitive, and supportive manner. The aims of this response are to:
      •   establish, as far as is possible, the cause of the child's death
      •   identify any modifiable or contributory factors 225
      •   provide ongoing support to the family
      •   learn lessons in order to reduce the risk of future child deaths and promote the
          health, safety, and wellbeing of other children
      •   ensure that all statutory obligations are met

396. Where a joint agency response is required, practitioners should follow the process
set out in ‘Sudden unexpected death in infancy and childhood: multi-agency guidelines for
care and investigation (2016)’ 226. A joint agency response is required if a child’s death:
      •   is or could be due to external causes
      •   is sudden and there is no immediately apparent cause (including sudden




222
    Child Death Review Statutory and Operational guidance
223
    Child death reviews: forms for reporting child deaths
224
    Child death notification form
225
    These are defined as factors that may have contributed to the death of the child and that might, by means of a locally or nationally
achievable intervention, be modified to reduce the risk of future deaths
226
    Sudden unexpected death in infancy and childhood: multi-agency guidelines for care and investigation – RCPCH Child Protection
Portal




                                                                 151
            unexpected death in infancy or childhood)
       •    occurs in custody, or where the child was detained under the Mental Health Act
       •    occurs where the initial circumstances raise any suspicions that the death may not
            have been natural
       •    occurs in the case of a stillbirth where no healthcare professional was in
            attendance

397. If there is an unexplained death of a child at home or in the community, the child
should normally be taken to a hospital emergency department rather than a mortuary. In
some cases when a child dies at home or in the community, the police may decide that it
is not appropriate to move the child’s body immediately, for example, because a forensic
examination is needed.

398. In a criminal investigation, the police are responsible for collecting and collating all
relevant information pertaining to a child’s death. Practitioners should consult the lead
police investigator and the Crown Prosecution Service to ensure that their enquiries do
not prejudice any criminal proceedings.

399. If the results of any investigations suggest evidence of abuse or neglect as a
possible cause of death whether at home or in the community, all practitioners should
inform relevant safeguarding partners and the panel immediately.

Child death review meeting
400. This is the multi-agency meeting that takes place prior to the CDOP review. At the
meeting, all matters relating to an individual child’s death are discussed by professionals
involved with the case. It should be attended by professionals who were directly involved
in the care of that child during their life and in the investigation into their death and should
not be limited to medical staff. A draft analysis form 227 of each individual case should be
sent after the meeting to the local CDOP to inform their review.

Review of death by CDOP
401. The review by CDOP is intended to be the final, independent scrutiny of a child’s
death by professionals with no responsibility for the child during their life. The information
gathered using all the standardised templates may help CDOP to identify modifiable
factors that could be altered to prevent future deaths.




227
      Child death reviews: forms for reporting child deaths




                                                              152
402. In addition to the statutory responsibilities set out above, the review should also
provide data to the National Child Mortality Database.

403. Child death review partners for a local authority area in England must prepare and
publish a report as set out in the statutory responsibilities above 228 229. They may
therefore wish to ask their CDOP to produce an annual report on local patterns and trends
in child deaths, any lessons learnt and actions taken, and the effectiveness of the wider
child death review process in order to assist child death review partners to prepare their
report.




228
      Children Act 2004 Section 16M
229
      Child Death Review: Statutory and Operational Guidance (England)




                                                               153
Appendix A: Glossary
Abuse - A form of maltreatment of a child. Somebody may abuse or neglect a child by
inflicting harm, or by failing to act to prevent harm. Harm can include ill treatment that is
not physical as well as the impact of witnessing ill treatment of others. This can be
particularly relevant, for example, in relation to the impact on children of all forms of
domestic abuse, including where they see, hear, or experience its effects. Children may
be abused in a family or in an institutional or extra-familial contexts by those known to
them or, more rarely, by others. Abuse can take place wholly online, or technology may
be used to facilitate offline abuse. Children may be abused by an adult or adults, or
another child or children.
Child criminal exploitation - As set out in the Serious Violence Strategy 230, published by
the Home Office, where an individual or group takes advantage of an imbalance of power
to coerce, control, manipulate or deceive a child or young person under the age of 18 into
any criminal activity (a) in exchange for something the victim needs or wants, and/or (b)
for the financial or other advantage of the perpetrator or facilitator and/or (c) through
violence or the threat of violence. The victim may have been criminally exploited even if
the activity appears consensual. Child criminal exploitation does not always involve
physical contact; it can also occur through the use of technology.
Child death review partners - A child death review partner in relation to a local authority
area in England is defined under the Children Act 2004 as (a) the local authority, and (b)
any integrated care board for an area any part of which falls within the local authority
area. The 2 partners must make arrangements for the review of each death of a child
normally resident in the area and may also, if they consider it appropriate, make
arrangements for the review of a death in their area of a child not normally resident there.
They must also make arrangements for the analysis of information about deaths reviewed
under this section. The purposes of a review or analysis are (a) to identify any matters
relating to the death or deaths that are relevant to the welfare of children in the area or to
public health and safety, and (b) to consider whether it would be appropriate for anyone to
take action in relation to any matters identified.
Child protection - Part of safeguarding and promoting welfare. This refers to the activity
that is undertaken to protect specific children who are suffering, or are likely to suffer,
significant harm.
Child sexual exploitation - Child sexual exploitation is a form of child sexual abuse. It
occurs where an individual or group takes advantage of an imbalance of power to coerce,
manipulate or deceive a child or young person under the age of 18 into sexual activity (a)



230
      Serious Violence Strategy




                                             154
in exchange for something the victim needs or wants, and/or (b) for the financial
advantage or increased status of the perpetrator or facilitator. The victim may have been
sexually exploited even if the sexual activity appears consensual. Child sexual exploitation
does not always involve physical contact; it can also occur through the use of technology.
Children - Anyone who has not yet reached their 18th birthday. The fact that a child has
reached 16 years of age, is living independently or is in further education, is a member of
the armed forces, is in hospital or in custody in the secure estate, does not change their
status or entitlements to services or protection.
Controlling or coercive behaviour - Also known as coercive control, controlling or
coercive behaviour is a form of domestic abuse. In 2015, the offence of controlling or
coercive behaviour was introduced under Section 76 of the Serious Crime Act as a
criminal offence. Controlling or coercive behaviour is included in the definition of domestic
abuse in section 1(3)(c) of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021.
Controlling or coercive behaviour is a pattern of abuse (on two or more occasions) that
involves multiple behaviours and tactics used by a perpetrator to (but not limited to) hurt,
humiliate, intimidate, exploit, isolate, and dominate the victim. It is an intentional pattern of
behaviour used to exert power, control, or coercion over another person. Controlling or
coercive behaviour is often committed in conjunction with other forms of abuse and is
often part of a wider pattern of abuse, including violent, sexual, or economic abuse.
Children can be used to control or coerce the victim, for example, by frustrating child
contact and/or child arrangements, telling the children to call the victim derogatory names
or to hit the victim, or by threatening to abduct the children.
This pattern of abuse causes fear, serious alarm and/or distress which can lead to a
substantial adverse effect on a victim’s day-to-day life. This can have a significant impact
on children and young people 231.
Section 68 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 came into force on 5 April 2023 and removed
the ‘living together’ requirement for the controlling or coercive behaviour offence, which
means that the offence applies to partners, ex-partners or family members, regardless of
whether the victim and perpetrator live together. More information about controlling or
coercive behaviour, including the impact on children can be found in the Controlling or
coercive behaviour: statutory guidance 232 and the Domestic Abuse Act 2021: statutory
guidance 233.




231
    As set out in the Serious Crime Act 2015 Section 76, a child cannot be considered a victim of coercive or controlling behaviour if
(see sub-section 3) “A” has parental responsibility for “B” (the child) and if “B” is under the age of 16. To note, children aged 16 to 17
can be considered victims of coercive or controlling behaviour in their own personal relationships.
232
    Controlling or coercive behaviour: statutory guidance
233
    Domestic Abuse Act 2021: statutory guidance




                                                                   155
County lines - As set out in the Serious Violence Strategy 234 published by the Home
Office, a term used to describe gangs and organised criminal networks involved in
exporting illegal drugs into one or more importing areas within the UK, using
dedicated mobile phone lines or other form of ‘deal line’. They are likely to exploit
children and vulnerable adults to move and store the drugs and money, and they will
often use coercion, intimidation, violence (including sexual violence) and weapons.
This activity can happen locally as well as across the UK; no specified distance of travel is
required. For further information see ‘Criminal exploitation of children and vulnerable
adults: county lines’ guidance 235.
Domestic abuse - The Domestic Abuse Act 2021 236 introduced the first ever statutory
definition of domestic abuse (section 1 of the Act). The statutory definition is clear that
domestic abuse may be a single incident or a course of conduct which can encompass a
wide range of abusive behaviours, including a) physical or sexual abuse; b) violent or
threatening behaviour; c) controlling or coercive behaviour; d) economic abuse; and e)
psychological, emotional, or other abuse.
Under the statutory definition, both the person who is carrying out the behaviour and the
person to whom the behaviour is directed towards must be aged 16 or over and they must
be “personally connected” (as defined in section 2 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021). The
definition ensures that different types of relationships are captured, including ex-partners
and family members.
All children can experience and be adversely affected by domestic abuse in the context of
their home life where domestic abuse occurs between family members, including where
those being abusive do not live with the child. Experiencing domestic abuse can have a
significant impact on children. Section 3 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 recognises the
impact of domestic abuse on children (0 to 18), as victims in their own right, if they see,
hear or experience the effects of abuse.
Young people can also experience domestic abuse within their own intimate relationships.
This form of child-on-child abuse is sometimes referred to as teenage relationship abuse.
Depending on the age of the young people, this may not be recognised in law under the
statutory definition of domestic abuse (if one or both parties are under 16). However, as
with any child under 18, where there are concerns about safety or welfare, child
safeguarding procedures should be followed and both young victims and young
perpetrators should be offered support.




234
    Serious Violence Strategy
235
    Criminal exploitation of children and vulnerable adults: county lines guidance (Home Office)
236
    Domestic Abuse Act 2021




                                                                156
The ‘Domestic Abuse Act 2021: statutory guidance’ 237 provides further advice for frontline
professionals who have responsibility for safeguarding and supporting victims of domestic
abuse, including children. This guidance provides further information about the different
forms of domestic abuse (including teenage relationship abuse and child to parent abuse)
and the impact of domestic abuse on children.
Education, health and care (EHC) plan - An education, health and care (EHC) plan
details the education, health and social care support that is to be provided to a child or
young person who has SEN. See the Special Educational Needs and Disability Code of
Practice 0-25 (2015).
Emotional abuse - The persistent emotional maltreatment of a child so as to cause
severe and persistent adverse effects on the child’s emotional development. It may
involve conveying to a child that they are worthless or unloved, inadequate, or valued only
insofar as they meet the needs of another person. It may include not giving the child
opportunities to express their views, deliberately silencing them, or making fun of what
they say or how they communicate. It may feature age or developmentally inappropriate
expectations being imposed on children. These may include interactions that are beyond
a child’s developmental capability, as well as overprotection and limitation of exploration
and learning, or preventing the child participating in normal social interaction. It may
involve seeing or hearing the ill-treatment of another. It may involve serious bullying
(including cyber bullying), causing children frequently to feel frightened or in danger, or
the exploitation or corruption of children. Some level of emotional abuse is involved in all
types of maltreatment of a child, though it may occur alone.
Extra-familial harm - Children may be at risk of or experiencing physical, sexual, or
emotional abuse and exploitation in contexts outside their families (see glossary definition
of extra-familial contexts).
While there is no legal definition for the term extra-familial harm, it is widely used to
describe different forms of harm that occur outside the home.
Children can be vulnerable to multiple forms of extra-familial harm from both adults and/or
other children. Examples of extra-familial harm may include (but are not limited to):
criminal exploitation (such as county lines and financial exploitation), serious violence,
modern slavery and trafficking, online harm, sexual exploitation, child-on-child (non-
familial) sexual abuse and other forms of harmful sexual behaviour displayed by children
towards their peers, abuse, and/or coercive control, children may experience in their own
intimate relationships (sometimes called teenage relationship abuse), and the influences
of extremism which could lead to radicalisation.




237
      Domestic Abuse Act 2021: statutory guidance




                                                    157
Extra-familial contexts - Extra-familial contexts include a range of environments outside
the family home in which harm can occur. These can include peer groups, school, and
community/public spaces, including known places in the community where there are
concerns about risks to children (for example, parks, housing estates, shopping centres,
takeaway restaurants, or transport hubs), as well as online, including social media or
gaming platforms.
Extremism - Extremism is defined in the Prevent strategy as the vocal or active
opposition to fundamental British values, including democracy, the rule of law, individual
liberty and mutual respect and tolerance of different faiths and beliefs. We also include in
our definition of extremism calls for the death of members of our armed forces.
Family group decision making - this is the umbrella term for family-led decision-making
forums, where a family network has all the resources, adequate preparation, relevant
information, a safe and appropriate environment, and private family time to make a plan to
response to concerns about a child’s safety or wellbeing. At pre-proceedings stage,
successful family group decision-making also includes having an independent
coordinator. Family group decision-making can take different forms. The Department for
Education does not prescribe a specific model, but a process which follows the steps set
out above.
Family group conference - this is one model of family group decision-making.
Family network - A group of people close to a child made up of relatives and non-
related connected people (where connected people has the same definition used in
the Care Planning, Placement and Case Review (England) Regulations 2010 238 in
addition to close family friends who have a connection with the child)
A family network could include step-parents, siblings, aunts, uncles, cousins,
grandparents, godparents, or close family friends.
Financial exploitation - Financial exploitation can take many forms. In this context, we
use the term to describe exploitation which takes place for the purpose of money
laundering. This is when criminals target children and adults and take advantage of an
imbalance of power to coerce, control, manipulate or deceive them into facilitating the
movement of illicit funds. This can include physical cash and/or payments through
financial products, such as bank and cryptocurrency accounts.
Kinship care - Kinship care is any situation in which a child is being raised in the care of
a friend or family member who is not their parent. The arrangement may be temporary or
longer term.




238
      The Care Planning, Placement and Case Review (England) Regulation 24




                                                             158
The following are all types of kinship care arrangements however this list is not
exhaustive:
      a. Informal kinship care arrangements (not approved foster care) including:
        i.     A private family arrangement in which a close family member who does not hold
               parental responsibility, raises the child and
                     •    the local authority has had no major role in making the arrangement for
                          the child
                     •    where a Family Court has not made an order in respect to the care of
                          the child.
       ii.     Where a child under the age of 16 is being provided with accommodation for
               less than 28 days by an individual in their own home who is not a close relative
       iii.    Where a 16 or 17 year old is being provided with accommodation by an
               individual who is not a close relative in their own home
      b. A private fostering arrangement in which someone who is not a close relative 239 of
         the child looks after the child for 28 days or more 240 (as per section 66(1)(a) and (b)
         of the Children Act 1989) 241
      c. Where a ‘lives with’ child arrangements order 242 has been granted in respect of the
         child, in favour of someone who is a friend or family member but is not the child’s
         parent.
      d. Where a special guardianship order has been granted appointing a friend or family
         member as the child’s special guardian.
      e. Where a child is a ‘looked after child’ by virtue of either an interim or final care
         order or being accommodated by the local authority (usually under section 20 of
         the Children Act 1989) and each of the following apply (this may be described as
         ‘kinship foster care’ or ‘family and friends foster care’):
        i.     The child is being cared for by a friend or family member who is not their parent,
               and
       ii.     The friend or family member is approved as a local authority foster carer on a
               temporary basis or following full assessment.




239
     In relation to private fostering, “relative” has the meaning given in section 105 of the Children Act 1989. It includes only the
following: grandparent, brother, sister, uncle or aunt (whether full blood or half blood or by marriage or civil partnership), and
stepparent (a married stepparent, including a civil partner).
240
     For the purposes of this kinship definition, the term private fostering arrangement includes only individuals accommodating a child.
It does not apply to organisations or bodies
241
     16- and 17-year olds who are disabled will be deemed to be in a private fostering arrangement.
242
      Pursuant to section 8 of the Children Act 1989




                                                                 159
   f. Where an adoption order has been granted in respect of the child and, prior to the
      making of the order, the adopter was a friend or family member.
Local authority designated officer (LADO) - County level and unitary local authorities
should ensure that allegations against people who work with children are not dealt with in
isolation. Any action necessary to address corresponding welfare concerns in relation to
the child or children involved should be taken without delay and in a coordinated manner.
Local authorities should, in addition, have designated a particular officer, or team of
officers (either as part of multi-agency arrangements or otherwise), to be involved in the
management and oversight of allegations against people who work with children. Any
such officer, or team of officers, should be sufficiently qualified and experienced to be able
to fulfil this role effectively, for example, qualified social workers. Any new appointments to
such a role, other than current or former designated officers moving between local
authorities, should be qualified social workers. Arrangements should be put in place to
ensure that any allegations about those who work with children are passed to the
designated officer, or team of officers, without delay.
Maltreatment - All forms of physical and/or emotional ill-treatment, sexual abuse, neglect,
or negligent treatment or commercial or other exploitation, resulting in actual or potential
harm to the child’s health, survival, development or dignity in the context of a relationship
of responsibility, trust or power.
Neglect - The persistent failure to meet a child’s basic physical and/or psychological
needs, likely to result in the serious impairment of the child’s health or development.
Neglect may occur during pregnancy as a result of maternal substance abuse. Once a
child is born, neglect may involve a parent or carer failing to:
       •   provide adequate food, clothing, and shelter (including exclusion from home or
           abandonment)
       •   protect a child from physical and emotional harm or danger
       •   ensure adequate supervision (including the use of inadequate caregivers)
       •   ensure access to appropriate medical care or treatment
       •   provide suitable education
It may also include neglect of, or unresponsiveness to, a child’s basic emotional needs
Parent carer - A person aged 18 or over who provides or intends to provide care for a
disabled child for whom the person has parental responsibility
Physical abuse - A form of abuse which may involve hitting, shaking, throwing,
poisoning, burning, or scalding, drowning, suffocating, or otherwise causing physical harm
to a child. Physical harm may also be caused when a parent or carer fabricates the
symptoms of, or deliberately induces, illness in a child.




                                             160
Relative - The Children Act 1989 (section 105) 243 defines a relative as in relation to a
child, meaning a grandparent, brother, sister, uncle or aunt (whether of the full blood or
half blood or by marriage or civil partnership) or step-parent. This guidance uses this
definition and includes cousins when referring to relatives.
Safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children - Defined for the purposes of this
guidance as:
       •   providing help and support to meet the needs of children as soon as problems
           emerge
       •   protecting children from maltreatment, whether that is within or outside the home,
           including online
       •   preventing impairment of children’s mental and physical health or development
       •   ensuring that children grow up in circumstances consistent with the provision of
           safe and effective care
       •   promoting the upbringing of children with their birth parents, or otherwise their
           family network through a kinship care arrangement, whenever possible and where
           this is in the best interests of the children
       •    taking action to enable all children to have the best outcomes in line with the
            outcomes set out in the Children’s Social Care National Framework.

Safeguarding partners - A safeguarding partner in relation to a local authority area in
England is defined under the Children Act 2004 as: (a) the local authority, (b) an
integrated care board for an area any part of which falls within the local authority area,
and (c) the chief officer of police for an area any part of which falls within the local
authority area. The three safeguarding partners should agree on ways to co-ordinate their
safeguarding services, act as a strategic leadership group in supporting and engaging
others, and implement local and national learning, including from serious child
safeguarding incidents. To fulfil this role, the 3 safeguarding partners must set out how
they will work together and with any relevant agencies as well as arrangements for
conducting local reviews.
Serious violence - Serious violence covers specific types of crime, such as homicide,
knife crime, and gun crime, and areas of criminality where serious violence or its threat is
inherent, such as in gangs and county lines drug dealing. It also includes crime threats
faced in some areas of the country such as the use of corrosive substances as a weapon.




243
      Children Act 1989 Section 105




                                                 161
For the purposes of the Serious Violence Duty, as per section 13 of the Police, Crime,
Sentencing and Courts Act 2022, Serious Violence in the local area is violence that is
serious in that area, taking account of: the maximum penalty which could be imposed for
the offence (if any) involved in the violence, the impact of the violence on any victim, the
prevalence of the violence in the area and the impact of the violence on the community in
the area.
Sexual abuse - Involves forcing or enticing a child or young person to take part in sexual
activities, not necessarily involving a high level of violence, whether or not the child is
aware of what is happening. The activities may involve physical contact, including assault
by penetration (for example, rape or oral sex) or non-penetrative acts, such as
masturbation, kissing, rubbing, and touching outside of clothing. They may also include
non-contact activities, such as involving children in looking at, or in the production of,
sexual images, watching sexual activities, encouraging children to behave in sexually
inappropriate ways, or grooming a child in preparation for abuse. Sexual abuse can take
place online, and technology can be used to facilitate offline abuse. Sexual abuse is not
solely perpetrated by adult males. Women can also commit acts of sexual abuse, as can
other children.
Young carer - A young carer is a person under 18 who provides or intends to provide
care for another person (of any age, except generally where that care is provided for
payment, pursuant to a contract or as voluntary work). Young adult carers are aged 16 to
25 and may have different support needs as they transition to adulthood.




                                            162
Appendix B: Further sources of information
Guidance issued by the Department for Education
  •   Care of unaccompanied migrant children and child victims of modern slavery
  •   Child sexual exploitation: definition and guide for practitioners
  •   Children Act 1989: court orders and pre-proceedings
  •   Children Act 1989 guidance and regulation volume 2: care planning, placement,
      and case review
  •   Children Act 1989: private fostering
  •   Keeping children safe in education: for schools and colleges
  •   Listening to and involving children and young people
  •   Managing risk of radicalisation in your education setting
  •   Mandatory reporting of female genital mutilation: procedural information
  •   Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
  •   National action plan to tackle child abuse linked to faith or belief
  •   National minimum standards for private fostering
  •   Non-Maintained Special Schools (England) Regulations 2015
  •   Pathways to harm, pathways to protection: a triennial analysis of serious case
      reviews, 2011 to 2014
  •   Preventing and tackling bullying
  •   Prevention of homelessness and provision of accommodation for 16 and 17 year
      old young people who may be homeless and/or require accommodation
  •   Safeguarding and social care for children
  •   Safeguarding children who may have been trafficked practice guidance
  •   Safeguarding strategy: unaccompanied asylum seeking and refugee children
  •   Social work post-qualifying standards: Knowledge and skills statements
  •   Statutory framework for the early years foundation stage (EYFS)
  •   Statutory guidance on children who run away or go missing from home or care
  •   Statutory visits to children with special educational needs and disabilities or health
      conditions in long-term residential settings




                                             163
    •   The Child Safeguarding Practice Review and Relevant Agency (England)
        Regulations 2018
    •   The Prevent duty: support for those working in education with safeguarding
        responsibilities
    •   United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child: how legislation underpins
        implementation in England
    •   Use of reasonable force in schools
    •   Visiting children in residential special schools and colleges statutory guidance
    •   What to do if you're worried a child is being abused: advice for practitioners



Guidance issued by other government departments and
agencies
•   Achieving best evidence in criminal proceedings: guidance on interviewing victims and
    witnesses, and guidance on using special measures Ministry of Justice
•   Apply for a forced marriage protection order Foreign, Commonwealth and
    Development Office
•   Asset plus: assessment and planning in the youth justice system Youth Justice Board
•   Carers strategy: second national action plan 2014-2016 Department of Health and
    Social Care
•   Channel and Prevent Multi-Agency Panel guidance: protecting people vulnerable to
    being drawn into terrorism Home Office
•   Child exploitation disruption toolkit Home Office
•   Commissioning framework for child sexual abuse support Home Office
•   Counter-terrorism strategy (CONTEST) Home Office
•   County lines offending: the Crown Prosecution Service legal guidance Crown
    Prosecution Service
•   Controlling or coercive behaviour: statutory guidance framework Home Office
•   Criminal exploitation of children and vulnerable adults: county lines Home Office
•   Cyber aware National Cyber Security Centre
•   DBS barring referral guidance Disclosure and Barring Service
•   Developing local substance misuse safeguarding protocols Public Health England
•   Disclosure and Barring Service




                                             164
•   Domestic Abuse Act 2021: statutory guidance Home Office
•   Every child matters: statutory guidance (arrangements to safeguard and promote the
    welfare of children UK Visas and Immigration
•   Female genital mutilation protection orders: factsheet Home Office
•   Female genital mutilation resource pack Home Office
•   Forced marriage Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, and Home Office
•   Forced marriage protection orders (application) HM Courts and Tribunals Service
•   Forced marriage resource pack Home Office
•   Forced marriage: statutory guidance for heads of safeguarding organisations, and non-
    statutory guidance for front-line professionals Home Office, and Foreign,
    Commonwealth and Development Office
•   Guidance for health professionals on domestic violence Department of Health and
    Social Care
•   Homelessness code of guidance for local authorities Department for Levelling Up,
    Housing and Communities
•   Mental Health Act 1983: Code of Practice Department of Health and Social Care
•   Missing children and adults: a cross-government strategy Home Office
•   Modern Slavery Act: statutory guidance Home Office
•   Multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA): Guidance Ministry of Justice,
    HM Prison and Probation Service
•   National service framework: children, young people, and maternity services
    Department of Health and Social Care
•   Practice direction 12A – care, supervision, and other part 4 proceedings: guide to case
    Management Ministry of Justice
•   Prevent duty guidance: for England and Wales Home Office
•   Prison, probation, and rehabilitation: public protection manual HM Prison and
    Probation Service
•   Probation Service Serious further offence procedures policy framework Ministry of
    Justice
•   Protocol for liaison and information exchange when criminal proceedings coincide with
    child safeguarding practice reviews in England Crown Prosecution Service
•   Recognised, valued and supported: next steps for the carers strategy 2010
    Department of Health and Social Care




                                           165
•   Safeguarding children, young people and adults at risk in the NHS: Safeguarding
    accountability and assurance framework NHS England
•   Serious and organised crime toolkit: an interactive toolkit for practitioners working with
    young people Home Office
•   Statutory guidance for integrated care boards on executive lead roles NHS England
•   Supporting children to stay safe online National Crime Agency/CEOP Education
•   Understanding the female genital mutilation enhanced dataset: updated guidance and
    clarification to support implementation Department of Health and Social Care
•   Violence against women and girls Home Office



Guidance issued by external organisations
•   Child maltreatment: when to suspect maltreatment in under 18s NICE
•   Child protection and the dental team British Dental Association
•   Child Protection Companion Royal college of Paediatrics and Child Health
•   Children’s Commissioner
•   Children’s rights and the law guide Children's Rights Alliance for England
•   Communicating with children: a guide for those working with children who have or may
    have been sexually abused Centre of Expertise on Child Sexual Abuse
•   Cyberbullying: understand, prevent, respond – guidance for schools Childnet
    International
•   Guide to UK General Data Protection Regulations (UK GDPR) Information
    Commissioner’s Office
•   Helping education settings identify and respond to concerns Centre of Expertise on
    Child Sexual Abuse
•   How we protect children’s rights Unicef
•   Independent Scrutiny and Local Safeguarding Children Partnerships Vulnerability
    Knowledge and Practice Programme
•   Inter-parental relationships Early Intervention Foundation
•   Multi-agency practice principles for responding to child exploitation and extra-familial
    harm Non-statutory guidance for local areas, developed by the Tackling Child
    Exploitation (TCE) Support Programme, funded by the Department for Education and
    supported by the Home Office, the Department for Health and Social Care and the
    Ministry of Justice



                                              166
•   NICE guideline on child abuse and neglect NICE
•   Police response to concern for a child College of Policing
•   Pre-proceedings and family justice hub Research in Practice and Essex County Council
•   Prison and Probation Ombudsman’s fatal incidents reports
•   Private fostering CoramBAAF
•   Protecting children and young people: doctors' responsibilities General Medical
    Council
•   Protective measures and civil orders College of Policing
•   Safeguarding children: toolkit for general practice Royal College of General
    Practitioners
•   Safer young lives research centre University of Bedfordshire
•   Signs and Indicators: a template for identifying and recording signs of child sexual
    abuse Centre of Expertise on Child Sexual Abuse
•   Standards for safeguarding and protecting children in sport NSPCC
•   Sudden unexpected death in infancy and childhood: multi-agency guidelines for care
    and investigation Royal College of Pathologists
•   Supporting parents and carers: a guide for those working with families affected by child
    sexual abuse Centre of Expertise on Child Sexual Abuse
•   UK Safer Internet Centre: Online safety advice and resources UK Safer Internet
    Centre
•   Whistleblowing advice line NSPCC
•   Working Together with Parents Network: Good practice guidance on working with
    parents with a learning disability (2021) University of Bristol




                                            167
© Crown copyright 2023
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3.

Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.


About this publication:

  enquiries www.education.gov.uk/contactus
  download www.gov.uk/government/publications



              Follow us on Twitter:               Like us on Facebook:
              @educationgovuk                     facebook.com/educationgovuk




                                           168

